Book I section [45]   

Caesar paene omni acie perterrita,
 quod praeter opinionem consuetudinemque acciderat,
 cohortatus suos legionem nonam subsidio ducit; 

Caesar, with his whole battle array all but petrified,
because it had happened contrary to opinion and custom,
having encouraged his men, leads the ninth legion as a reinforcement;


hostem insolenter atque acriter nostros insequentem supprimit
 rursusque terga vertere seque ad oppidum Ilerdam recipere
 et sub muro consistere cogit. 

he insolently and fiercely contains the pursued enemy 
and collects our men to turn back and recover to the town of Ilerda,
to stand fast under the wall.


Sed nonae legionis milites elati studio,
 dum sarcire acceptum detrimentum volunt,
 temere insecuti longius fugientes in locum iniquum progrediuntur
 et sub montem,
 in quo erat oppidum positum Ilerda,
 succedunt. 

But the soldiers of the ninth legion, raised high with their zeal,
while they wanted to make good their received defeat,
rashly having pursued further the fleeing men into a disadvantageous place they
proceed and up to the mountion,
on which the town of Ilerda was sited,
they advanced.


Hinc se recipere cum vellent, rursus illi ex loco superiore nostros premebant. 

From here they would wish to recover themselves, they pressed hard our
men from the higher ground.


Praeruptus locus erat utraque ex parte derectus
 ac tantum in latitudinem patebat,
 ut tres instructae cohortes eum locum explerent,
 ut neque subsidia ab lateribus submitti
 neque equites laborantibus usui esse possent. 

The steep site was both from the side aligned
and extended so much in breadth,
in order that three armed cohorts filled up this spot,
so that and not reinforcements from the flanks to be relieved
and not the cavalry could be to use of those oppressed/working.


Ab oppido autem declivis locus tenui fastigio vergebat in longitudinem passuum
circiter CCCC. 

But from the town the place sloped down from a slight elevation 
for about four miles.


Hac nostris erat receptus,
 quod eo incitati studio inconsultius processerant; 

By this it was retreated by our men,
because by it they had advanced urged on by overly rash zeal;


hoc pugnabatur loco,
 et propter angustias iniquo
 et quod sub ipsis radicibus montis constiterant,
 ut nullum frustra telum in eos mitteretur. 

this was fought by the place,
and on account of the narrow passes disadvantageously
and because they had made a stand at the very foot of the mountains,
so that no spear was hurled into them.


Tamen virtute et patientia nitebantur atque omnia vulnera sustinebant. 

Nevertheless by courage and hardiness they advanced and sustained all wounds.


Augebatur illis copia,
 atque ex castris cohortes per oppidum crebro submittebantur,
 ut integri defessis succederent. 

It was increased to them in abundance,
and out of the camp the cohorts were frequently relieved from the town,
so that fresh troops succeeded the exhausted ones.


Hoc idem Caesar facere cogebatur,
 ut submissis in eundem locum cohortibus defessos reciperet.

Caesar himself was collecting to do this,
so that by/to the relieved in the same place might take in the exhausted men by
the cohorts.
