
Book I section [39] 

Erant, ut supra demonstratum est, legiones Afranii tres, Petreii duae,
 praeterea scutatae citerioris provinciae
 et caetratae ulterioris Hispaniae cohortes circiter LXXX
 equitumque utriusque provinciae circiter V milia. 

There were, as has already been mentioned, three of Afranius' legions and two of
Petreius', besides about 80 cohorts of the nearby province (with long shields)
and of further Spain (with small ones) and provincial horse approaching 5000.

Caesar legiones in Hispaniam praemiserat VI,
 auxilia peditum V milia, equitum III milia,
 quae omnibus superioribus bellis habuerat,
 et parem ex Gallia numerum,
 quam ipse pacaverat,
 nominatim ex omnibus civitatibus nobilissimo et fortissimo quoque evocato,
 huc optimi generis hominum ex Aquitanis montanisque,
 qui Galliam provinciam attingunt addiderat. 

Caesar had sent 6 legions ahead into Spain,
5000 auxiliaries of infantry, 300 of horse,
which he had held to be the best combatants of all,
and an equal number from Gaul,
which he himself had subdued,
by name from all of the cities by/to the noblest and strongest also summoned,
to here of the best families of men out of Aquitane and the mountains,
he had added those who touch the province of Gaul.


Audierat Pompeium per Mauretaniam cum legionibus iter in Hispaniam facere
confestimque esse venturum. 

He had heard that Pompey had made a journey through Mauretania into Spain with
his legions and that his arrival was imminent.


Simul a tribunis militum centurionibusque mutuas pecunias sumpsit;
 has exercitui distribuit. 

At the same time he took up borrowed money from the soldiers' tribunes and the
centurions; he distributed these to the army.


Quo facto duas res consecutus est,
 quod pignore animos centurionum devinxit
 et largitione militum voluntates redemit.

When this was done two things followed,
that/because/which he bound fast the spirit of the centurions with a pledge
and made good the good will of the soldiers by his generousity.
