Book I section   [7] 

Quibus rebus cognitis Caesar apud milites contionatur. 

 After being acquainted with these facts, Caesar addresses his troops.

Omnium temporum iniurias inimicorum in se commemorat; 
a quibus deductum ac depravatum Pompeium queritur invidia atque obtrectatione
laudis suae, cuius ipse honori et dignitati semper faverit adiutorque fuerit. 

 He calls to mind the injustices of his enemies against him, in all
 circumstances; he laments that Pompey, whose honor and dignity he himself had
 always favored and supported, was misled and perverted by those enemies with
 envy and disparagement of his esteem.

Novum in re publica introductum exemplum queritur,
 ut tribunicia intercessio armis notaretur atque opprimeretur,
 quae superioribus annis armis esset restituta. 

 He laments a new precedent introduced into the republic, 
 to oppose and suppress by force of arms the tribune's veto,
 which had been restored in recent years.

Sullam nudata omnibus rebus tribunicia potestate tamen intercessionem liberam
reliquisse. 

 That Sulla, having stripped the tribunal power bare in all things, had
 nevertheless left them the freedom of a veto. 

Pompeium, qui amissa restituisse videatur, dona etiam, quae ante habuerint,
ademisse. 

 That Pompey, who seems to have restored what had been lost, 
 had taken away even those good things that he had restored.

Quotienscumque sit decretum, darent operam magistratus, ne quid res publica
detrimenti caperet (qua voce et quo senatus consulto populus Romanus ad arma sit
vocatus), factum in perniciosis legibus, in vi tribunicia, in secessione populi
templis locisque editioribus occupatis: atque haec superioris aetatis exempla
expiata Saturnini atque Gracchorum casibus docet; quarum rerum illo tempore
nihil factum, ne cogitatum quidem. 

 That whenever there was a decree, the magistrates should take care, that the
 republic not take harm (which would summon the Roman people to arms), done in
 destructive laws, in the tribunal power, in the revolt of the people, seizing
 temples and high places: and he points out the earlier examples of Saturninus
 and the Gracchuses atoned for by their overthrow. Nothing like that was 
 happening now, indeed it hadn't even been considered.

nulla lex promulgata, non cum populo agi coeptum, nulla secessio
facta. Hortatur, cuius imperatoris ductu VIIII annis rem publicam felicissime
gesserint plurimaque proelia secunda fecerint, omnem Galliam Germaniamque
pacaverint, ut eius existimationem dignitatemque ab inimicis
defendant. 

 No law had been proclaimed, nothing undertaken with the people, 
 no revolt had occurred.

 He urges them to defend from his enemies the reputation and dignity of the
 general under whose leadership they had very successfuly served for nine years
 and had fought a great many subsequent battles and had pacified Gaul and
 Germany.

Conclamant legionis XIII, quae aderat, milites—hanc enim initio
tumultus evocaverat, reliquae nondum convenerant—sese paratos esse imperatoris
sui tribunorumque plebis iniurias defendere.    

 Those soldiers of the 13th Legion who were present (for he had summoned the
 legion at the start of the disorder, and the rest hadn't yet gathered)
 cried out that they were prepared to thwart the injustices
 against the general and his people's tribunes.
