Book I section [30] 

Itaque in praesentia Pompei sequendi rationem omittit, 
 in Hispaniam proficisci constituit: 
 duumviris municipiorum omnium imperat,
 ut naves conquirant Brundisiumque deducendas curent. 

And so he lays aside his plan of pursuing Pompey for the present,
he resolves to depart for Spain:
he orders pairs of magistrates for every town,
to search for ships and arrange for bringing them to Brundisium.


Mittit in Sardiniam cum legione una Valerium legatum,
 in Siciliam Curionem pro praetore cum legionibus duabus;
 eundem, cum Siciliam recepisset,
 protinus in Africam traducere exercitum iubet. 

He sends legate Valerius to Sardinia with one legion,
Curio to Sicily as praetor with two legions;
also, after he had recovered Sicily,
he immediately orders the army to be brought across into Africa.


Sardiniam obtinebat M. Cotta, Siciliam M. Cato;
 Africam sorte Tubero obtinere debebat. 

M. Cotta occupied Sardinia, and M. Cato Sicily;
 Tubero was chosen by lot to occupy Africa.


Caralitani, simul ad se Valerium mitti audierunt,
 nondum profecto ex Italia sua sponte Cottam ex oppido eiciunt. 

The Caralitans, who likewise heard that they were to be sent to Valerium,
not yet departed from Italy by their own free will threw Cotta out of the town.


Ille perterritus, quod omnem provinciam consentire intellegebat,
 ex Sardinia in Africam profugit. 

He, terrified, because he understood that the entire province was plotting, 
fled Sardinia for Africa.


Cato in Sicilia naves longas veteres reficiebat,
 novas civitatibus imperabat. 

Cato repaired ancient galleys in Sicily,
he ordered new ones from the cities.


Haec magno studio agebat. 

He did these things with great zeal.


In Lucanis Brutiisque per legatos suos civium Romanorum delectus habebat,
 equitum peditumque certum numerum a civitatibus Siciliae exigebat. 

In Lucan Brutius he held, through his legates, a levy of Roman citizens, 
he expelled a fixed number of cavalry and foot from the towns of Sicily.


Quibus rebus paene perfectis adventu Curionis cognito queritur
 in contione sese proiectum ac proditum a Cn. Pompeio,
 qui omnibus rebus imparatissimis non necessarium bellum suscepisset
 et ab se reliquisque in senatu interrogatus omnia sibi esse
 ad bellum apta ac parata confirmavisset. 

By these things nearly completed when the arrival of Curio was known he
complained in the assembly that he himself was thrown down and advanced by
Cn. Pompey,
who to/by all not ready things had undertaken an unnecessay war
and by himself and the rest in the senate he was questioned in all respects to
be to himself he had declared to the war suitable and ready things.



Haec in contione questus ex provincia fugit.

He fled these things in the assembly of the protest out of the province.
