Book I section [27] 
Prope dimidia parte operis a Caesare effecta diebusque in ea re consumptis VIIII
naves a consulibus Dyrrachio remissae,
 quae priorem partem exercitus eo deportaverant, Brundisium revertuntur.

Towards noon, part of the work having been wrought by Caesar, 
9 nines having been consumed in the business
the ships were sent back by the consuls,
which had conveyed the first part of the army, were returned to Brundisium.

 Pompeius sive operibus Caesaris permotus sive etiam quod ab initio Italia
 excedere constituerat,
 adventu navium profectionem parare incipit et,
 quo facilius impetum Caesaris tardaret,
 ne sub ipsa profectione milites oppidum irrumperent,
 portas obstruit,
 vicos plateasque inaedificat,
 fossas transversas viis praeducit atque ibi sudes stipitesque praeacutos
 defigit. 

Pompey, whether agitated by Caesar's fortifications 
or still/as well that/because he had from the beginning resolved to withdraw
from Italy,
by the arrival of the ships begins to prepare for his departure
and, by which/who more easily check Caesar's assault,
lest under the things by the departure the soldiers might pillage the town,
he barricades the gates,
walls up the streets and avenues,
constructs trenches across the roads and fixes stakes and posts there.


Haec levibus cratibus terraque inaequat;
 aditus autem atque itinera duo,
 quae extra murum ad portum ferebant,
 maximis defixis trabibus atque eis praeacutis praesepit.

He levels these with light/smooth wicker and dirt;
but both the approaches and passages,
which bore outside the walls to the port,
he blocks with the largest fixed and pointed logs.

His paratis rebus milites silentio naves conscendere iubet,
 expeditos autem ex evocatis,
 sagittariis funditoribusque raros in muro turribusque disponit.

Having prepared these things, he orders the soldiers to board the ships in
silence, 
but he posts the light infantry called up from the levies, with a few archers and
men with slingshots on the wall and in the towers.


Hos certo signo revocare constituit,
 cum omnes milites naves conscendissent,
 atque eis expedito loco actuaria navigia relinquit.

He decides to recall these with a certain signal,
after all of the soldiers had boarded the ships,
and to/by them leaves swift ships behind for the lightly armed post.
