Book I section [46] 

Hoc cum esset modo pugnatum continenter horis quinque
 nostrique gravius a multitudine premerentur,
 consumptis omnibus telis gladiis destrictis
 impetum adversus montem in cohortes faciunt,
 paucisque deiectis reliquos sese convertere cogunt. 

While the battle was waged in this way without pause for five hours
and our men were more heavily pressed by a great number,
with everyone having been exhausted by javelins swords stripped off,
they made an attack against the mountion in cohorts,
and with few thrown down they gathered the rest to withdraw.


Submotis sub murum cohortibus
 ac nonnullam partem propter terrorem
 in oppidum compulsis facilis est nostris receptus datus. 

The cohorts having dislodged up to the wall
and ... several parts by means of panic
into the town having been easily driven together retreat is given to our men.


Equitatus autem noster ab utroque latere,
 etsi deiectis atque inferioribus locis constiterat,
 tamen summa in iugum virtute connititur
 atque inter duas acies perequitans commodiorem
 ac tutiorem nostris receptum dat. 

But our cavalry from both flanks,
although it was in a downcast and inferior position,
nevertheless with the greatest courage it strained the yoke
and between the two battle lines riding through of the standards
and protected men it was given retreat by/to our men.

Ita vario certamine pugnatum est. 

Thus by various combats the battle raged.


Nostri in primo congressu circiter LXX ceciderunt,
 in his Q. Fulginius ex primo hastato legionis XIIII,
 qui propter eximiam virtutem ex inferioribus ordinibus in eum locum pervenerat;
 vulnerantur amplius DC. 

Our men in the first clash about 70 fell,
in these Q. Fulginius from the first centurion of the 9th legion,
who on account of extraordinary courage from the inferior ranks had reached the
position; more than 600 were wounded.


Ex Afranianis interficiuntur T. Caecilius, primi pili centurio,
 et praeter eum centuriones IIII, milites amplius CC.

Out of Afranicus' men were killed T. Caecilius, the primary centurion,
and besides him four centurions, and more than 200 soldiers.
