Book I section   [7] 

Quibus rebus cognitis Caesar apud milites contionatur. 

 After being acquainted with these facts, Caesar addresses his troops.

Omnium temporum iniurias inimicorum in se commemorat; 
a quibus deductum ac depravatum Pompeium queritur invidia atque obtrectatione
laudis suae, cuius ipse honori et dignitati semper faverit adiutorque fuerit. 

 He recalls the injustices of his enemies against him, in every time;
 by these he protests against the misled and perverted Pompey with ill will and 
 disparagement of his praise, of whom he himself always favored honor and
 dignaty and would be the supporter.

Novum in re publica introductum exemplum queritur,
 ut tribunicia intercessio armis notaretur atque opprimeretur,
 quae superioribus annis armis esset restituta. 

 He protests a new precedent introduced in the republic, 
 to observe and suppress the tribune's veto by force of arms,
 which would have been restored in previous years.

Sullam nudata omnibus rebus tribunicia potestate tamen intercessionem liberam
reliquisse. 

 (He says that) Sulla had nevertheless left the free intervention by the
 tribunal power stripped bare in all things.

Pompeium, qui amissa restituisse videatur, dona etiam, quae ante habuerint,
ademisse. 

 And that Pompey, who seems to have restored what had been lost, 
 had taken away even those gifts which he had restored.

Quotienscumque sit decretum, darent operam magistratus, ne quid res publica
detrimenti caperet (qua voce et quo senatus consulto populus Romanus ad arma sit
vocatus), factum in perniciosis legibus, in vi tribunicia, in secessione populi
templis locisque editioribus occupatis: atque haec superioris aetatis exempla
expiata Saturnini atque Gracchorum casibus docet; quarum rerum illo tempore
nihil factum, ne cogitatum quidem. 

 Every time that it would be decided, the magistrates would give work/care, lest
 what the republic should seize of the defeat (by which voice and decision of?
 the senate the Roman people might be summoned), done in destructive laws, in
 the tribunal power, in the revolt of the people, seizing temples and high
 places: and he points out these earlier examples of Saturninus and the
 Gracchians atoned for by misfortunes; nothing was done about those things in
 that time, lest it had indeed been considered.

nulla lex promulgata, non cum populo agi coeptum, nulla secessio
facta. Hortatur, cuius imperatoris ductu VIIII annis rem publicam felicissime
gesserint plurimaque proelia secunda fecerint, omnem Galliam Germaniamque
pacaverint, ut eius existimationem dignitatemque ab inimicis
defendant. 

 No law had been proclaimed, not with the people to be undertaken, 
 no revolt had occurred.  He urges, of whom of the ruler they had governed by
 conduct the republic for nine years most successfully
 and had waged the greatest following battles, they had pacified Gaul and
 Germany, to protect their opinion and dignity from enemies.

Conclamant legionis XIII, quae aderat, milites—hanc enim initio
tumultus evocaverat, reliquae nondum convenerant—sese paratos esse imperatoris
sui tribunorumque plebis iniurias defendere.    

 The soldiers of the 13th Legion, who were present, cried out - for he had
 called it forth by the beginning of the commotion - that they were ready 
 of the ruler and his people's tribunes to defend the injustices.
