
5.1
Eodem Brutus contendit aucto navium numero.

Nam ad eas, quae factae erant Arelate per Caesarem,
captivae Massiliensium accesserant sex.

Has superioribus diebus refecerat atque omnibus rebus instruxerat.

Itaque suos cohortatus,
quos integros superarissent ut victos contemnerent,
plenus spei bonae atque animi adversus eos proficiscitur.

Facile erat ex castris C. Trebonii atque omnibus superioribus locis prospicere
 in urbem, ut omnis iuventus, quae in oppido remanserat,
 omnesque superioris aetatis cum liberis atque uxoribus ex publicis locis
 custodiisque aut e muro ad caelum manus tenderent,
 aut templa deorum immortalium adirent et ante simulacra proiecti victoriam ab
 diis exposcerent.

Neque erat quisquam omnium,
quin in eius diei casu suarum omnium fortunarum eventum consistere
existimaret.

Nam et honesti ex iuventute et cuiusque aetatis amplissimi
nominatim evocati atque obsecrati naves conscenderant ut,
si quid adversi accidisset,
ne ad conandum quidem sibi quicquam reliqui fore viderent;
si superavissent,
vel domesticis opibus vel externis auxiliis de salute urbis confiderent.


Brutus likewise fought with an increased number of ships.

For they'd added six ships, captured from the Massilians, to those that
had been built at Arles on Caesar's command.

He had repaired these very recently and had prepared for all eventualities.

And so having roused his men, those fresh troops who had been overcome
so that they were looked down on as vanquished,
filled with good hope and spirit he set out to face the enemy.

From the camp of C. Trebonius and from all the high places it was easy
to see into the city,
so that all the young men who had remained in the town,
and all those of the next generation with their children and wives
in the common areas or watch posts or on the city wall stretched their hands out
to heaven, 
or they visited the temples of the immortal gods and throwing themselves down
before the images begged the gods for victory.

And there wasn't anyone at all that didn't think that the fate of all their
fortunes depended on the outcome of this day.

For the distinguished men, both the youths and those of a greater age,
were called by name and were entreated to board the ships
so that if anything of the foes happened,
that they wouldn't see for themselves that anyone would be left for the attempt;
if they had conquered,
with either their private wealth or the external support
they might be sure about the prosperity of the city.
