Book I section[40] 

Fabius finitimarum civitatum animos litteris nuntiisque temptabat. 

Fabius tested the courage of the neighoring cities with a letter and messengers.


In Sicori flumine pontes effecerat duos distantes inter se milia passuum IIII. 

On Sicorian River he had brought about two separate bridges within 4 miles.


His pontibus pabulatum mittebat,
 quod ea quae citra flumen fuerant,
 superioribus diebus consumpserat. 

By means of these bridges he was sending forage,
because/that those things which were on this side of the river,
he had already used up in the last few days. 


Hoc idem fere atque eadem de causa Pompeiani exercitus duces faciebant,
 crebroque inter se equestribus proeliis contendebant. 

This likewise/same nearly and the same on accound of Pompey's army 
the leaders/generals were doing,
and frequently between themselves were contending the battle with cavalry.


Huc cum cotidiana consuetudine congressae pabulatoribus praesidio
 propiore ponte legiones Fabianae duae flumen transissent,
 impedimentaque et omnis equitatus sequeretur,
 subito vi ventorum et aquae magnitudine pons est interruptus
 et reliqua multitudo equitum interclusa. 

To this place by daily habit of approaches by the foragers by the guard
by the closer bridge two legions of Fabianus crossed the river,
and he followed the heavy baggage and all the cavalry,
suddenly by the strength of the winds and water in intensity the bridge was
broken up and the remaining great number of horse was cut off.


Quo cognito a Petreio et Afranio ex aggere atque cratibus,
 quae flumine ferebantur, celeriter suo ponte Afranius,
 quem oppido castrisque coniunctum habebat,
 legiones IIII equitatumque omnem traiecit
 duabusque Fabianis occurrit legionibus. 

This having been learned by Petreius and Afrainius from causeway/pier and
wicker that were being carried by the river, Afrainius,
whom the juncture exceedingly held and with the field,
 quickly with/to his own bridge transferred 4 legions and the whole cavalry
and Fabianis opposed them with two legions.


Cuius adventu nuntiato L. Plancus,
 qui legionibus praeerat,
 necessaria re coactus locum capit superiorem
 diversamque aciem in duas partes constituit,
 ne ab equitatu circumveniri posset. 

At the arrival of whose messenger L Plancus,
who commanded the legions,
having collected the necessities of the matter he siezed the high ground
and established separate battle lines in two parts,
lest he could be encircles by the cavalry.


Ita congressus impari numero magnos impetus legionum equitatusque sustinet. 

And so, having been met with an unequal number he sustained powerful assaults of
legions and horse.


Commisso ab equitibus proelio signa legionum duarum procul ab utrisque
 conspiciuntur, quas C. Fabius ulteriore ponte subsidio nostris miserat
 suspicatus fore id,
 quod accidit,
 ut duces adversariorum occasione et beneficio fortunae ad nostros opprimendos
 uterentur. 

Having engaged in battle by the horse, the standards of two legions at a
distance by each other were spied, which C. Fabius had sent to the further
bridge with the reinforcements of our men. 


Quarum adventu proelium dirimitur, ac suas uterque legiones reducit in castra.

Of which by the arrival the battle was interrupted/delayed,
and he led back both of his own legions into the camp.
