Book I section [32] 

His rebus confectis Caesar, ut reliquum tempus a
labore intermitteretur, milites in proxima municipia
deducit; ipse ad urbem proficiscitur.  Coacto senatu
iniurias inimicorum commemorat.  Docet se nullum
extraordinarium honorem appetisse, sed exspectato
legitimo tempore consulatus eo fuisse contentum, quod
omnibus civibus pateret.  Latum ab X tribunis plebis
contradicentibus inimicis, Catone vero acerrime
repugnante et pristina consuetudine dicendi mora dies
extrahente, ut sui ratio absentis haberetur, ipso
consule Pompeio; qui si improbasset, cur ferri passus
esset?  Si probasset, cur se uti populi beneficio
prohibuisset?  Patientiam proponit suam, cum de
exercitibus dimittendis ultro postulavisset; in quo
iacturam dignitatis atque honoris ipse facturus esset.
Acerbitatem inimicorum docet, qui, quod ab altero
postularent, in se recusarent, atque omnia permisceri
mallent, quam imperium exercitusque dimittere.
Iniuriam in eripiendis legionibus praedicat,
crudelitatem et insolentiam in circumscribendis
tribunis plebis; condiciones a se latas, expetita
colloquia et denegata commemorat.  Pro quibus rebus
hortatur ac postulat, ut rem publicam suscipiant atque
una secum administrent.  Sin timore defugiant, illis
se oneri non futurum et per se rem publicam
administraturum.  Legatos ad Pompeium de compositione
mitti oportere, neque se reformidare, quod in senatu
Pompeius paulo ante dixisset, ad quos legati
mitterentur, his auctoritatem attribui timoremque
eorum, qui mitterent significari.  Tenuis atque
infirmi haec animi videri.  Se vero, ut operibus
anteire studuerit, sic iustitia et aequitate velle
superare.





After completing these actions, Caesar turns his
troops aside into the neighboring towns to take some
rest.  He himself sets out for the city.  After
convening the senate, he places the injustices of his
enemies on record.  He points out that he had sought
no special honor but had been content to wait until
the proper time for the consulship, which stands open
to all citizens.  Supported by 10 tribunes of the
people, who spoke in opposition to his enemies,
despite Cato opposing most fiercely and by old habit
filibustering for a day, so that he might be
considered by reason of his absence, under consul
Pompey himself; who, if he had disapproved, why had he
allowed it to be carried out?  If he had approved, why
had he forbidden the people the right of his
employment?  He relates his patience, when he had
voluntarily requested that the armies be disbanded; by
which he himself would receive a loss of dignity and
honor.  He points out the bitterness of his enemies,
who were demanding of another what they rejected for
themselves, and preferred to confound everyone than to
dismiss their command and army.  He proclaims the
injustice in the legions that had been snatched away
from him, and the cruelty and insolence in restricting
the tribunes of the people.  He relates the proposals
that he himself had made, and the talks that he'd
requested but been denied.  On account of these things
he urges and demands that they support the republic
and unite with him in managing it.  But if, through
fear, they wished to avoid this, he'd not be a burden
to them and would administer the republic himself.  He
said that it was needful to send legates to Pompey
around a union, and that he himself did not fear what
Pompey had said in the senate a little earlier, that
authority was granted to those whom the legates had
been sent to, and fear was shown by those who sent
them.  That these things seemed to be from a feeble
and frail soul.  That indeed he, to strive to go ahead
with the business, wished thus to succeed with justice
and fairness.
