81.1 
Tum vero neque ad explorandum idoneum locum castris
 neque ad progrediendum data facultate consistunt necessario
 et procul ab aqua
 et natura iniquo loco castra ponunt. 

Then truly neither for scouting out a suitable site for a camp
or for advancing with the means given they halted of necessity
and far from water
and by nature by a disadvantageous location they set up camp.

Sed isdem de causis Caesar,
 quae supra sunt demonstratae,
 proelio non lacessit et eo die tabernacula statui passus non est,
 quo paratiores essent ad insequendum omnes,
 sive noctu sive interdiu erumperent. 

But the same Caesar about the causes,
which were previously pointed out,
doesn't provoke a battle and on the day tents to set up he did not allow,
by which/whom all of the more prepared were for attacking,
whether by night or by day they might sally forth.

Illi animadverso vitio castrorum tota nocte munitiones proferunt
 castraque castris convertunt. 

those/to him having noticed the fault of the camp all night they brought the
fortifications forward and turned the camp into a camp.

Hoc idem postero die a prima luce faciunt
 totumque in ea re diem consumunt. 

This same next day from first light they do 
and they used up the whole day in this matter.

Sed quantum opere processerant et castra protulerant, 
 tanto aberant ab aqua longius,
 et praesenti malo aliis malis remedia dabantur. 

But how much by the work they advanced and brought the camp forward,
that much they were farther away from water,
and in the present evil to all they were given a remedy.

Prima nocte aquandi causa nemo egreditur ex castris;
 proximo die praesidio in castris relicto universas ad aquam copias educunt,
 pabulatum emittitur nemo. 

Early in the night for the sake of fetching water no one went out of camp;
on the next day the guard left in camp lead all the troops to water,
no one was let out to forage.


His eos suppliciis male haberi Caesar
 et necessariam subire deditionem quam proelio decertare malebat. 

to/by these sufferings Caesar was held poorly
and >needed to come up with aid surrender than the guard preferred to fight.

Conatur tamen eos vallo fossaque circummunire,
 ut quam maxime repentinas eorum eruptiones demoretur;
 quo necessario descensuros existimabat. 

he attempted nevertheless them to/by the wall/pallisade and ditch to fortify,
to as much as possible >sudden sorties of them keep back;
by which he considered for the demeaning/reduced by necessity.

Illi et inopia pabuli adducti et,
 quo essent expeditiores,
 omnia sarcinaria iumenta interfici iubent.

They and with want of fodder contracted and,
by which the the scouts might be,
all pack-bearing mules to be killed they commanded.
