39.1 Curio cum omnibus copiis quarta vigilia exierat cohortibus V castris
 praesidio relictis.
Progressus milia passuum VI equites convenit, rem gestam cognovit;
e captivis quaerit, quis castris ad Bagradam praesit: respondent Saburram.
Reliqua studio itineris conficiendi quaerere praetermittit
proximaque respiciens signa,
"videtisne," inquit, "milites, captivorum orationem cum perfugis convenire?
abesse regem, exiguas esse copias missas,
quae paucis equitibus pares esse non potuerint?
Proinde ad praedam, ad gloriam properate,
ut iam de praemiis vestris et de referenda gratia cogitare incipiamus."
Erant per se magna, quae gesserant equites,
praesertim cum eorum exiguus numerus cum tanta multitudine Numidarum confertur.
Haec tamen ab ipsis inflatius commemorabantur,
ut de suis homines laudibus libenter praedicant.
Multa praeterea spolia praeferebantur,
capti homines equique producebantur,
ut, quicquid intercederet temporis, hoc omne victoriam morari videretur.
Ita spei Curionis militum studia non deerant.
Equites sequi iubet sese iterque accelerat,
ut quam maxime ex fuga perterritos adoriri posset.
At illi itinere totius noctis confecti subsequi non poterant,
atque alii alio loco resistebant.
Ne haec quidem Curionem ad spem morabantur.


Curio had marched out of the camp with all his troops during the fourth watch,
leaving 5 cohorts as a garrison.
After advancing 6 miles and meeting up with his horse,
he was informed of their actions.
He asked the prisoners who was in command of the camp at the Bagrada,
and they replied: Saburra.
In his enthusiasm in finishing the march he neglected to inquire about other
things, and, looking back at the nearest battle standards, said,
"Don't you see, soldiers, that the prisoners' words agree with the deserters'?
They say that the king is not here, that paltry troops have been sent,
which could not be a match for a few horsemen?
So then, make haste, to spoils, to renown,
so that we might now begin to think on your rewards and on what will be carried
home in gratitude."
There were great things that the cavalry had themselves done,
especially since their meager numbers had been the match of such a multitude of Numidians.
Nevertheless they remembered these things as greater than they were,
as men men freely declare in praise of themselves.
Besides, they were looking forward to a great deal of spoils,
captured men and horses were being led forward,
so that, whatever time might pass, it would seem that their victory was being
delayed by all this. 
So there was no lack of enthusiasm of the hope of Curio's soldiers.
He ordered the cavalry in pursuit and himself quickened the march,
to fall upon men panicked from their flight as soon as possible.
But although they marched all night long, they couldn't catch them up,
and others had stayed behind in another place.
Not even this thing delayed Curio to hope.
