4.1
Massilienses post superius incommodum veteres ad eundem numerum ex navalibus
productas naves refecerant summaque industria armaverant
(remigum, gubernatorum magna copia suppetebat)
piscatoriasque adiecerant atque contexerant,
ut essent ab ictu telorum remiges tuti;
has sagittariis tormentisque compleverunt.

Tali modo instructa classe omnium seniorum, matrum familiae, virginum precibus
 et fletu excitati, extremo tempore civitati subvenirent,
 non minore animo ac fiducia, quam ante dimicaverant, naves conscendunt.

Communi enim fit vitio naturae,
ut inusitatis atque incognitis rebus magis confidamus vehementiusque
exterreamur; ut tum accidit.

Adventus enim L. Nasidii summa spe et voluntate civitatem compleverat.

Nacti idoneum ventum ex portu exeunt et Tauroenta,
quod est castellum Massilensium,
ad Nasidium perveniunt ibique naves expediunt rursusque se ad confligendum animo
confirmant et consilia communicant.

Dextra pars attribuitur Massiliensibus, sinistra Nasidio.


After the aforesaid setback, the Massilians had refurbished some older ships
that they had brought out from the docks at about the same number 
and had equipped with the utmost industry
(a large number of oarsmen, of helmsmen were at hand)
and they had added fishing boats and roofed them over,
to keep the the oarsmen safe from a flight of darts:
they'd finished up these ships with archers and catapults.

With the fleet fitted in this way, stirred up by the prayers and weeping of all
the old men, the mothers of the households, and the maidens,
that they might aid the city in those desparate times,
they boarded the ships
with no less courage and faith than they had previously done battle. 

For it might befall the public by a fault of nature,
that we might believe in more strange and unknown things
and very much be frightened; that then would happen.

The arrival of L. Nasidius had filled the city with the utmost hope and good
will.

Having obtained a favorable wind they sail out of port and Tauroenta,
which is the fortress of the Massilians, to Nasidius they reached and there
made ready the ships
and again selves to fighting with heart they declared and shared their plans.

The right wing was assigned to the Massilians, the left to Nasidius.
