Book I section [22] 

Quarta vigilia circiter Lentulus Spinther de muro cum vigiliis custodibusque
nostris colloquitur; 
velle, si sibi fiat potestas, Caesarem convenire. 

At around the fourth watch Lentulus Spinther, from the wall, converses with our
sentries and guards; that he wishes, if at all possible, for Caesar to come and
meet with him.

Facta potestate ex oppido mittitur, neque ab eo prius Domitiani milites
discedunt, quam in conspectum Caesaris deducatur. 

The opportunity/power having been done/taken place, he is sent from the town,
and not from/by the earlier soldiers of Domitius withdraw, than he is
escorted/drawn away in Caesar's sight.

Cum eo de salute sua agit, orat atque obsecrat, ut sibi parcat, veteremque
amicitiam commemorat Caesarisque in se beneficia exponit; quae erant maxima:
quod per eum in collegium pontificum venerat, quod provinciam Hispaniam ex
praetura habuerat, quod in petitione consulatus erat sublevatus. 

While he drives him from his safety, he begs and entreats that he be spared, and
mentions the old friendship and sets out to Caesar in his kindnesses, which were
great: that he had come into the college of high priests with his aid, that he
had held the province of Spain from his praetorship, that he had been raised up
into the consulship in his candidacy.

Cuius orationem Caesar interpellat: se non maleficii causa ex provincia
egressum, sed uti se a contumeliis inimicorum defenderet, ut tribunos plebis in
ea re ex civitate expulsos in suam dignitatem restitueret, ut se et populum
Romanum factione paucorum oppressum in libertatem vindicaret. 

But Caesar interrupts the speech: himself not on account of a crime had marched
out of the province, but in order to defend himself from the affronts of
enemies, to restore the peoples' tribunes in the matter of their expulsion from
the city into their position, to vindicate himself and the Roman people from/by
a faction of the few, suppressed in their liberty.

Cuius oratione confirmatus Lentulus, ut in oppidum reverti liceat, petit: quod
de sua salute impetraverit, fore etiam reliquis ad suam spem solatio; adeo esse
perterritos nonnullos, ut suae vitae durius consulere cogantur. 

And whose speech Lentulus, encouraged that he might be permitted to return to
the town, requests: that he might obtain his own safety, to yet be, for the
others, the comfort to his own hope; precisely to be considerable terrified men,
to be gathered to look out for their own lives more sternly.

Facta potestate discedit.

The power having been done, he withdraws.


