88.1 Caesar, cum Pompei castris appropinquasset, ad hunc modum aciem
eius instructam animadvertit.  Erant in sinistro cornu legiones duae
traditae a Caesare initio dissensionis ex senatus consulto; quarum
una prima, altera tertia appellabatur.  In eo loco ipse erat
Pompeius.  Mediam aciem Scipio cum legionibus Syriacis tenebat.
Ciliciensis legio coniuncta cum cohortibus Hispanis, quas traductas
ab Afranio docuimus, in dextro cornu erant collocatae.  Has
firmissimas se habere Pompeius existimabat.  Reliquas inter aciem
mediam cornuaque interiecerat numeroque cohortes CX expleverat.  Haec
erant milia XLV, evocatorum circiter duo, quae ex beneficiariis
superiorum exercituum ad eum convenerant; quae tot acie disperserat.
Reliquas cohortes VII castris propinquisque castellis praesidio
disposuerat.  Dextrum cornu eius rivus quidam impeditis ripis
muniebat; quam ob causam cunctum equitatum, sagittarios funditoresque
omnes sinistro cornu obiecerat.

When Caesar had gotten close to Pompey's camp, he observed that his
line was prepared according to the following manner.  In the left
wing were the two legions that had been surrendered by Caesar at the
beginning of the conflict by the decision of the senate; one of these
was called the First, and the other the Third.  Pompey was in this
position.  Scipio held the middle of the line with the Syrian
legions.  The legion of Cilicia, joined up with Spanish cohorts,
which we have shown were tranferred from Afranius, had been stationed
on the right wing.  Pompey judged that these were the staunchest
troops he had.  He'd plugged the rest in between the middle of the
line and the wings and had filled it out to number 110 cohortes.
There were 45,000 of these, around two of volunteers, that had
gathered to him from the bodyguards of previous armies; and that he
had scattered along the whole line.  He'd posted the remaining 7
cohorts in the camp and nearby towns as a garrison.  A stream was
protecting his right wing with its inaccessible banks; and because of
this he'd thrown all of his calvary, archers and slingers over to
defend the left wing.
