74.1 

Quorum discessu liberam nacti milites colloquiorum facultatem vulgo procedunt,
 et quem quisque in castris notum aut municipem habebat conquirit atque evocat. 

Of which conversations the soldiers, having obtained soldiers free means for
departure advance commonly, 
and >which each one in the camp having learned or >citizen/native was having
sought and called out.

Primum agunt gratias omnibus, quod sibi perterritis pridie pepercissent:
 eorum se beneficio vivere. 

At first they give thanks to all, 
because/that to themselves, very frightened the day before they had spared:
of them themselves by service to survive.

Deinde de imperatoris fide quaerunt,
 rectene se illi sint commissuri,
 et quod non ab initio fecerint armaque
 cum hominibus necessariis et consanguineis contulerint, queruntur. 

Next from the general's trust they asked/demanded,
properly lest they themselves be united/entrusted,
and that/because not from the start they might do
and arms with necessary men and kinsmen they might carry together,
they protest.

His provocati sermonibus fidem ab imperatore de Petreii atque Afranii vita
 petunt,
 ne quod in se scelus concepisse neu suos prodidisse videantur. 

These, called out/changed by the speeches >faith/loyalty by/from the general
from the life of Petrius and Afranius they asked for,
lest what in themselves sin to have devised or not >their men to have prolonged
they might seem.

Quibus confirmatis rebus se statim signa translaturos confirmant 
legatosque de pace primorum ordinum centuriones ad Caesarem mittunt. 

to/by whom, made secure/encouraged, by events themselves at once the standards
>about to carry across they declare
and >envoys about peace of the leaders of the rank the centurions to Caesar they send.

Interim alii suos in castra invitandi causa adducunt,
 alii ab suis abducuntur,
 adeo ut una castra iam facta ex binis viderentur; 
compluresque tribuni militum et centuriones ad Caesarem veniunt
 seque ei commendant. 

In the meantime some persuade their men in the camp should for the sake of
summoning, others by/from their men lead away,
to such a degree that one camp now/already made of two seemed;
and many of the military tribunes and centurions to Caesar come
and entrust themselves to him.

Idem hoc fit a principibus Hispaniae,
 quos evocaverant et secum in castris habebant obsidum loco. 

likewise this thing is done by the Spanish leaders,
>whom they summoned and with them in the camp were holding hostage in place.

Hi suos notos hospitesque quaerebant,
 per quem quisque eorum aditum commendationis haberet ad Caesarem. 

They >their own friends/known and guests/strangers were seeking,
through whom each one of them might have a chance of recommendation to Caesar.

Afranii etiam filius adulescens de sua ac parentis sui salute
 cum Caesare per Sulpicium legatum agebat. 

Even Afranius' younger son about his own safety and his father's
when to/by Caesar through the envoy Sulpicius drove.

Erant plena laetitia et gratulatione omnia,
 eorum, qui tanta pericula vitasse,
 et eorum, qui sine vulnere tantas res confecisse videbantur,
 magnumque fructum suae pristinae lenitatis omnium iudicio Caesar ferebat,
 consiliumque eius a cunctis probabatur.

There were by full joy and all rejoicing,
of those who had avoided such danger,
and of those who without a wound >such things seemed to have finished/subdued,
and >all great profits by their former lenience Caesar was bearing to/by
opinion, 
and his advice/plan was approved by all.
