Book I section [25] 

His datis mandatis Brundisium cum legionibus VI pervenit,
 veteranis III et reliquis,
 quas ex novo dilectu confecerat atque in itinere compleverat; 
 Domitianas enim cohortes protinus a Corfinio in Siciliam miserat. 

After the orders were given he arrives in Brundisium with 6 legions,
3 of them made up of veterans and the rest assembled from the new levies
and supplied on the road;
for he had sent Domitius' cohorts straight from Corfinium to Sicily.


Reperit consules Dyrrachium profectos cum magna parte exercitus, 
Pompeium remanere Brundisii cum cohortibus viginti;
 neque certum inveniri poterat, obtinendine Brundisii causa ibi remansisset,
 quo facilius omne Hadriaticum mare ex ultimis Italiae partibus regionibusque
 Graeciae in potestate haberet atque ex utraque parte bellum administrare
 posset,
 an inopia navium ibi restitisset,
 veritusque ne ille Italiam dimittendam non existimaret,
 exitus administrationesque Brundisini portus impedire instituit. 

He discovers that the consuls having left Dyrrachium with part of the army,
that Pompey stayed at Brundisium with twenty cohorts;
and he could not be found a fixed/regular man/thing,
lest he remain there for the sake of occupying Brundisium,
where easier each with the Adriatic Sea from the end of Italy 
and with parts of the regions of Greece that he might hold in strength
and could manage the war from the other region,
whether the weakness of the ships there (he) might have resisted/stayed,
and revered lest that one, about to abandon Italy, might not value,
prepares to prevent the departures and operations of the port of Brundisium.


Quorum operum haec erat ratio. 

Of which works/fortifications this was the plan.

Qua fauces erant angustissimae portus,
 moles atque aggerem ab utraque parte litoris iaciebat,
 quod his locis erat vadosum mare. 

By which route the narrow passes were very narrow of the port,
he was hurling the jettys and ramp from the other part of the shore,
because/that in these places the sea was full of shallows.

Longius progressus,
 cum agger altiore aqua contineri non posset,
 rates duplices quoquoversus pedum XXX e regione molis collocabat. 

Having advanced further,
 he could not be hindered/kept safe/sustained by deep/high water,
 he assembled double rafts in every direction of 30 feet from the region of the
 ramp. 

Has quaternis ancoris ex IIII angulis destinabat, ne fluctibus moverentur. 

He fixed these for anchors from the four corners, lest they be moved by the
waves. 

His perfectis collocatisque alias deinceps pari magnitudine rates iungebat. 

Having completed and arranged these things, he joined the other rafts in order
of equal size.

Has terra atque aggere integebat,
 ne aditus atque incursus ad defendendum impediretur. 

He covered these with mounds and earth,
 lest the attack and assault be hindered to being repelled.

A fronte atque ab utroque latere cratibus ac pluteis protegebat;
 in quarta quaque earum turres binorum tabulatorum excitabat,
 quo commodius ab impetu navium incendiisque defenderet.

From the front and from the other side he covered with brush and breastworks;
in a fourth and which of them he erected towers two stories tall,
where more suitable from attack of the ships and fires he might defend.
