Book I section [32] 

His rebus confectis Caesar, 
ut reliquum tempus a labore intermitteretur, 
milites in proxima municipia deducit; 
ipse ad urbem proficiscitur. 

After completing these actions, Caesar,
in order to leave off from labor for the remaining time,
leads the troops into the neighboring towns;
he himself proceeds to the city (Rome?).


Coacto senatu iniurias inimicorum commemorat. 

When the senate has convened he places the injuries of his enemies on record.


Docet se nullum extraordinarium honorem appetisse, 
sed exspectato legitimo tempore consulatus eo fuisse contentum, 
quod omnibus civibus pateret. 

He points out the he had sought no special honor,
but having waiting for the the proper time, 
the consulship had been preserved by him,
because he had been open to all citizens.


Latum ab X tribunis plebis contradicentibus inimicis, 
Catone vero acerrime repugnante et pristina consuetudine dicendi mora dies
extrahente, 
ut sui ratio absentis haberetur, ipso consule Pompeio ; 
qui si improbasset, cur ferri passus esset? 

brought by the 10 tribunes of the people contradicting/speaking against enemies,
by/to Cato in truth most fiercely opposing and by his former habit/experience
saying prolonging by a delay of days,
so that the reason for his absence was held, by consul Pompey himself;
who, if he had disapproved, why had he carried a sword?


Si probasset, cur se uti populi beneficio prohibuisset? 

I he had approved, why had he forbidden the people to use their right?


Patientiam proponit suam, cum de exercitibus dimittendis ultro postulavisset; 
in quo iacturam dignitatis atque honoris ipse facturus esset. 

He relates his patience, when he had demanded from the armies about to be
disbanded beyond;
in which he himself was about to make a loss of dignity and honor.


Acerbitatem inimicorum docet, 
qui, quod ab altero postularent, in se recusarent, 
atque omnia permisceri mallent, quam imperium exercitusque dimittere. 

He points out the bitterness of his enemies,
who, because they were demanding by another, were objecting to himself,
and preferred to embroil everything, than to dismiss the command and army.


Iniuriam in eripiendis legionibus praedicat, 
crudelitatem et insolentiam in circumscribendis tribunis plebis; 
condiciones a se latas, expetita colloquia et denegata commemorat. 

He proclaims his injury in the snatched away legions,
the cruelty and insolence in confining the tribunes of the people;
relates the conditions by himself brought, the requested talks and denied.


Pro quibus rebus hortatur ac postulat, 
ut rem publicam suscipiant atque una secum administrent. 

On account of these things he urges and demands,
so that they might support the republic and manage only/some with him.


Sin timore defugiant, 
illis se oneri non futurum et per se rem publicam administraturum. 

But if they were to escape dread,
to/by those self to the burden not going to be and 
through self at the republic going to direct.


Legatos ad Pompeium de compositione mitti oportere, neque se reformidare, 
quod in senatu Pompeius paulo ante dixisset, ad quos legati mitterentur, 
his auctoritatem attribui timoremque eorum, qui mitterent significari. 

Legates to Pompey from the arrangement to be sent to require,
and not self to dread,
because/that in the senate Pompey had spoken a little earlier,
to whom the legates had been sent,
to/by these authority to be assigned and their fear,
who might send to be shown.


Tenuis atque infirmi haec animi videri. 

Of feeble and frail these things soul to be seen.


Se vero, ut operibus anteire studuerit,
sic iustitia et aequitate velle superare.

Self, in truth, so that to/by the works he would desire to go ahead,
so justice and fairness to wish to overcome.
