26.1 His rebus gestis Curio se in castra ad Bagradam recipit atque
universi exercitus conclamatione imperator appellatur posteroque die
exercitum Uticam ducit et prope oppidum castra ponit.  Nondum opere
castrorum perfecto equites ex statione nuntiant magna auxilia
equitum peditumque ab rege missa Uticam venire; eodemque tempore vis
magna pulveris cernebatur, et vestigio temporis primum agmen erat in
conspectu.  Novitate rei Curio permotus praemittit equites, qui
primum impetum sustineant ac morentur; ipse celeriter ab opere
deductis legionibus aciem instruit.  Equitesque committunt proelium
et, priusquam plane legiones explicari et consistere possent, tota
auxilia regis impedita ac perturbata, quod nullo ordine et sine
timore iter fecerant, in fugam coniciunt equitatuque omni fere
incolumi, quod se per litora celeriter in oppidum recepit, magnum
peditum numerum interficiunt.


After doing all this, Curio returned to his camp at Bagrada and, by
the acclamation of the whole army, was named commander-in-chief.  On
the next day he led the army to Utica and pitched camp near the
town.  Before the defenses of the camp had been completed, horsemen
from the watch reported that large reinforcements of horse and
infantry that had been sent by the king had arrived at Utica; and at
the same time a great abundance of dust was discerned, and in a
moment the first troops came into view.  Curio, agitated by this
strange event, sent his cavalry forward.  They held back the initial
charge and delayed it, while he himself quickly drew up a line of
battle from the legions that he pulled away from the work.  But
before the legions could be clearly deployed and make a stand, the
cavalry engaged the battle and routed all the king's reinforcements,
which had been impeded and thrown into confusion because they'd made
the march without order or apprehension, Very few of their cavalry
were harmed, because they quickly retreated along the shore and into
the town, bit our men killed a large number of the foot soldiers.
