[48] 
Accidit etiam repentinum incommodum biduo, quo haec gesta sunt.

Furthermore, for two days something unexpected and inconvenient happened,
by which these things were borne.


Tanta enim tempestas cooritur,
 ut numquam illis locis maiores aquas fuisse constaret. 

For there appeared such storms that it was said that there had never been so
much water in those parts. 


Tum autem ex omnibus montibus nives proluit
 ac summas ripas fluminis superavit pontesque ambo,
 quos C. Fabius fecerat, uno die interrupit. 

But then snowmelt from all the mountains 
overtopped the highest banks of the river, and both the bridges
that C. Fabius had built were broken up in a single day.


Quae res magnas difficultates exercitui Caesaris attulit. 

And this matter brought great difficulties to Caesar's army.


Castra enim, ut supra demonstratum est, cum essent inter flumina duo,
 Sicorim et Cingam, spatio milium XXX, neutrum horum transiri poterat,
 necessarioque omnes his angustiis continebantur.

For the camp, as has been already described, was between two rivers,
the Sicoris and the Cinga, about 300 paces apart, neither of which could be
crossed, and by necessity everyone was confined in a narrow space.


Neque civitates, quae ad Caesaris amicitiam accesserant,
 frumentum supportare, neque ei, qui pabulatum longius progressi erant,
 interclusi fluminibus reverti neque maximi commeatus,
 qui ex Italia Galliaque veniebant, in castra pervenire poterant. 

The towns, that had undertaken an alliance with Caesar for transporting his
supplies, could not reach the camp.  Neither could the men who from
Italy and Gaul, who were out foraging far afield and were cut off and turned
back by the rivers, without much in the way of provisions.


Tempus erat autem difficillimum,
 quo neque frumenta in hibernis erant neque multum a maturitate aberant;

Moreover it was a very difficult time of year,
in which the supplies were not yet in storage and not quite ripe.


 ac civitates exinanitae,
 quod Afranius paene omne frumentum ante Caesaris adventum Ilerdam convexerat,
 reliqui si quid fuerat,
 Caesar superioribus diebus consumpserat; 

And the towns were desolate,
because before Caesar's arrival Afranius had nearly emptied them of supplies,
which he'd transported to Ilerda, 
and in the last few days Caesar had used up anything that had been left.


pecora, quod secundum poterat esse inopiae subsidium,
 propter bellum finitimae civitates longius removerant. 

And due to the war the neighboring towns had driven off the cattle, which could
have been used for the needs of the second reserves.


Qui erant pabulandi aut frumentandi causa progressi,
 hos levis armaturae Lusitani peritique earum regionum
 cetrati citerioris Hispaniae consectabantur;

Those who were foraging and purveying on account of having advanced,
those of light armor of Lusitanians and skilled of the regions
armed with a light shield on the side of Spain they were pursuing;


quibus erat proclive tranare flumen,
 quod consuetudo eorum omnium est,
 ut sine utribus ad exercitum non eant.

to/by which was sloping down to swim across the river,
which by/to their custom is of all,
so that they do not go to the army without leathers/either.
