Book I section [35] 

Evocat ad se Caesar Massilia XV primos; cum his agit, ne initium
inferendi belli a Massiliensibus oriatur: debere eos Italiae
totius auctoritatem sequi potius quam unius hominis voluntati
obtemperare.  Reliqua, quae ad eorum sanandas mentes pertinere
arbitrabatur, commemorat.  Cuius orationem legati domum referunt
atque ex auctoritate haec Caesari renuntiant: intellegere se
divisum esse populum Romanum in partes duas; neque sui iudicii
neque suarum esse virium discernere, utra pars iustiorem habeat
causam.  Principes vero esse earum partium Cn. Pompeium et
C. Caesarem patronos civitatis; quorum alter agros Volcarum
Arecomicorum et Helviorum publice iis concesserit, alter bello
victos Sallyas attribuerit vectigaliaque auxerit.  Quare paribus
eorum beneficiis parem se quoque voluntatem tribuere debere et
neutrum eorum contra alterum iuvare aut urbe aut portibus
recipere.  Caesar calls the 15 chief men of Massilia out to see
him; he negotiates with them, to keep them from sparking a war.
He tells them that they ought to follow the decree of all Italy
rather than obey a single man's will.



Caesar calls the 15 chief men of Massilia out to see him; he
negotiates with them, to keep them from sparking a war.  He tells
them that they ought to follow the authority of all Italy rather than
obey a single man's will.  He recalled other matters to them,
which he thought would reach their mending hearts.  The envoys
carry his speech home and by their authority report these things to 
Caesar: that they understand that the Roman people are divided
into two parties: that they can distinguish neither of their
authority nor of their forces, which one might have the more
lawful case.  In truth, the leaders of the parties were
Cn. Pompey and C. Caesar, patrons of the city; one of whom had
publicly granted the fields of the Volcae Arecomici and Helvii to
them, while the other had bestowed the Sallyae, who had been
conquered in war, and increased their revenues.  How should they
to grant a choice comparable to the comparable benefits as well,
and undertake to help neither of them against the other, with
either the city or the ports.


