Book I section [41] 

Eo biduo Caesar cum equitibus DCCCC,
 quos sibi praesidio reliquerat,
 in castra pervenit. 

In two days Caesar arrived at the camp with a detachment of 900 horse that he
had kept with him. 



Pons, qui fuerat tempestate interruptus, paene erat refectus;
 hunc noctu perfici iussit. 

The bridge that had been broken up in the storm was nearly rebuilt;
he ordered it to be completed in the night.


Ipse cognita locorum natura ponti castrisque praesidio sex cohortes reliquit
 atque omnia impedimenta
 et postero die omnibus copiis triplici instructa acie ad Ilerdam proficiscitur
 et sub castris Afranii constitit et ibi paulisper sub armis moratus facit
 aequo loco pugnandi potestatem. 

After acquainting himself with the environs, he leaves six cohorts
to guard the bridge and the camp and all the baggage.
He sets out for Ilerda on the next day with all his troops, drawn up in three
lines,
and comes to a halt before the camp of Afranius.
After a short wait, under arms, he gives him the opportunity of fighting on
level/even/equal ground. 


Potestate facta Afranius copias educit et in medio colle sub castris
constituit. 

This opportunity having been granted, Afranius leads out his troops and draws
them up in the middle of the hill before his camp.


Caesar, ubi cognovit per Afranium stare, quo minus proelio dimicaretur,
 ab infimis radicibus montis intermissis circiter passibus CCCC castra facere
 constituit et,
 ne in opere faciundo milites repentino hostium incursu exterrerentur
 atque opere prohiberentur,
 vallo muniri vetuit, quod eminere et procul videri necesse erat,
 sed a fronte contra hostem pedum XV fossam fieri iussit. 

Caesar, when he learned that Afranius was taking his stand, 
by whom/which he might hazard less in the battle,
he made camp about 400 paces from the interrupted foot of the mountain
and, 
to keep the soldiers from being frightened in doing the work by an unexpected
enemy attack, 
and that they might hinder the work,
he did not allow a palisade to be erected
because it was essential to stand out and be seen from a distance.
But he did order a 15 foot trench to be dug at the front, facing the enemy.


Prima et secunda acies in armis, ut ab initio constituta erat, permanebat;
 post has opus in occulto a III acie fiebat. 

The first and second lines in arms, remained as they had been from the
beginning; behind them fortifications were built by the third line, in secret.


Sic omne prius est perfectum, quam intellegeretur ab Afranio castra muniri. 

And so each work was completed, as it was learned that the camp was fortified by
Afranius. 


Sub vesperum Caesar intra hanc fossam legiones reducit atque ibi sub armis
proxima nocte conquiescit.

Before evening Caesar leads the legions into this ditch
and there takes his rest under arms in the coming night.
