Book I section 4: 

Omnibus his resistitur, omnibusque oratio consulis, Scipionis, Catonis
opponitur. Catonem veteres inimicitiae Caesaris incitant et dolor
repulsae. Lentulus aeris alieni magnitudine et spe exercitus ac provinciarum et
regum appellandorum largitionibus movetur, seque alterum fore Sullam inter suos
gloriatur, ad quem summa imperii redeat. Scipionem eadem spes provinciae atque
exercituum impellit, quos se pro necessitudine partiturum cum Pompeio
arbitratur, simul iudiciorum metus, adulatio atque ostentatio sui et potentium,
qui in re publica iudiciisque tum plurimum pollebant. Ipse Pompeius, ab inimicis
Caesaris incitatus, et quod neminem dignitate secum exaequari volebat, totum se
ab eius amicitia averterat et cum communibus inimicis in gratiam redierat,
quorum ipse maximam partem illo affinitatis tempore iniunxerat Caesari; simul
infamia duarum legionum permotus, quas ab itinere Asiae Syriaeque ad suam
potentiam dominatumque converterat, rem ad arma deduci studebat.

This is resisted by every man, and the speech of the consuls Scipio and Cato 
are opposed by all.  

The veterans of Caesar's war and the pain of defeat arouse
Cato. 
OR
The hostilities of Caesar and the pain of rejection
 arouse Cato and the veterans.

Lentulus is moved by the extent of foreign money/strange atmosphere
 and by the expectation of the army and of the provinces
 and by the bribery of encroaching kings,
 and he boasts that he would be another Sulla among
his men, to whom he'd return the utmost matters of command.

Likewise, Scipio is compelled by the expectation of the province and the armies,
 which he himself considers
in the face of the necessity of dividing them with Pompey, 
at the same time the dread of the judgements,
the flattery and ostentation of his men and of those with power,
who exerted the most influence in the republic and in judgements at that time.

Pompey himself, urged on by the enemies of Caesar, and because no one wanted
to be made equal in worth with him, had turned himself completely away from his
friendship and gone back with common enemies in favor, of whom he himself 
had united to Caesar
the greatest part in that time of in-law-dom;
likewise
influenced by the the disgrace of the two legions,
that had turned back from the road to Asia and Syria to his power and domain, 
he busied himself with the matter of being drawn to arms.

