Book I section [9] 

Quae res etsi nihil ad levandas iniurias pertinere videbantur, tamen idoneos
nactus homines, per quos ea, quae vellet, ad eum perferrentur, petit ab utroque,
quoniam Pompei mandata ad se detulerint, ne graventur sua quoque ad eum
postulata deferre, si parvo labore magnas controversias tollere atque omnem
Italiam metu liberare possint. 

 Although these matters seemed to concern nothing to relieving, nevertheless,
 having obtained sufficient men, by means of whom he wished, they'd endure to
 the end to him, he asks of both sides, because Pompei's commands were reported
 to him, lest they be burdened by his demands to defer to him, if by a little
 effort to raise/destroy great disputes and they could free all of Italy from
 fear.

Sibi semper primam rei publicae fuisse dignitatem vitaque potiorem. 

 To him the foremost of the republic was to be the worth and superior by
 life. 

Doluisse se, quod populi Romani beneficium sibi per contumeliam ab inimicis
extorqueretur, ereptoque semenstri imperio in urbem retraheretur, cuius absentis
rationem haberi proximis comitiis populus iussisset.

 To have suffered himself, that the favor of the Roman people might be torn away
 from him by his enemies, by abuse, to whose absence to be held by the nearest
 elections the people might have decreed.

Tamen hanc iacturam honoris sui rei publicae causa aequo animo tulisse; 

 Nevertheless, to destroy/raise this sacrifice of his honor for the republic by
 reason of an even mind;

cum litteras ad senatum miserit, ut omnes ab exercitibus discederent, ne id
quidem impetravisse. 

 after/since/when he had sent a letter to the senate, so that all men might
 withdraw from the army, lest it surely to procure.

Tota Italia delectus haberi, retineri legiones II, quae ab se simulatione
Parthici belli sint abductae, civitatem esse in armis.

 All Italy to be selected, two legions to be retained, which by himselfs by the
 pretense the handsome Parthicians might be seduced, the city to be in arms.

Quonam haec omnia nisi ad suam perniciem pertinere? 

 To whichever place all these things unless to his ruin to reach?

Sed tamen ad omnia se descendere paratum atque omnia pati rei publicae causa.

 But nevertheless to all to lower himself, prepared and to suffer all things for
 the cause of the republic.

Proficiscatur Pompeius in suas provincias, ipsi exercitus dimittant, discedant
in Italia omnes ab armis, metus e civitate tollatur, libera comitia atque omnis
res publica senatui populoque Romano permittatur.

 Pompei might depart into his provinces, they might send the army away to
 themselves, everyone from the army withdraw into Italy, fear be lifted from the
 city, free elections and the republic of all be permitted to the senate and
 Roman people.

Haec quo facilius certisque condicionibus fiant et iureiurando sanciantur, aut
ipse propius accedat aut se patiatur accedere:

 These things therefore the easier and by fixed agreements might be made and
 confirmed by an oath, or he himself might approach nearer or might suffer
 himself to aproach:

fore uti per colloquia omnes controversiae componantur.

 by the forum so that through dialog all disputes might be settled.
