Book 1: Lines 1-20

Text:

I sing of the hero who came from Troy to found a new empire in Italy ...but why was Juno so angry against him?

Arma uirumque cano, Troiae qui primus ab oris 1.1
Italiam fato profugus Lauiniaque uenit
litora, multum ille et terris iactatus et alto
ui superum, saeuae memorem Iunonis ob iram,
multa quoque et bello passus, dum conderet urbem 5
inferretque deos Latio; genus unde Latinum
Albanique patres atque altae moenia Romae.
Musa, mihi causas memora, quo numine laeso
quidue dolens regina deum tot uoluere casus
insignem pietate uirum, tot adire labores 10
impulerit. tantaene animis caelestibus irae?

I sing of arms and a man, who, by fate a fugitive,
first came from the shores of Troy to Italy and Lavinia's coast.
Hard was he tossed about on land and sea by heaven's violence,
on account of fierce Juno's wrath, which never forgets.
And too, he suffered much in war, until he might build a city
and carry his gods to Latium; from whence comes the Latin line
and the fathers of Alba and the walls of towering Rome.
Muse, remind me of the reasons, why her divinity was offended
or why the grieving queen of the gods compelled this man of notable goodness
to pass through so many calamities, to undertake so many labors.
Can the celestial souls really hold wrath so great?


Now Juno loved Carthage, but she had heard that a race sprung from Troy was destined to overthrow it. 

  Vrbs antiqua fuit (Tyrii tenuere coloni)
Karthago, Italiam contra Tiberinaque longe
ostia, diues opum studiisque asperrima belli,
quam Iuno fertur terris magis omnibus unam 15
posthabita coluisse Samo. hic illius arma,
hic currus fuit; hoc regnum dea gentibus esse,
si qua fata sinant, iam tum tenditque fouetque.
progeniem sed enim Troiano a sanguine duci
audierat Tyrias olim quae uerteret arces; 20

There was an ancient city, Carthage (a colony of Tyre),
facing Italy, but distant from the Tiber's mouth,
rich in wealth and most savage in their zeal for war.
Juno thought better of it alone than all other lands,
with even her cherished Samos less esteemed.
Here were her arms, here her chariot;
this kingdom would be a goddess for the people, if the Fates allowed,
at present then she held and fostered it.
But she had once heard that a race that had been sprung from Trojan blood
would topple Tyre's citadels.


hinc populum late regem belloque superbum
uenturum excidio Libyae; sic uoluere Parcas.
id metuens ueterisque memor Saturnia belli,
prima quod ad Troiam pro caris gesserat Argis—
necdum etiam causae irarum saeuique dolores 25
exciderant animo; manet alta mente repostum
iudicium Paridis spretaeque iniuria formae
et genus inuisum et rapti Ganymedis honores:
his accensa super iactatos aequore toto
Troas, reliquias Danaum atque immitis Achilli, 30
arcebat longe Latio, multosque per annos
errabant acti fatis maria omnia circum.
tantae molis erat Romanam condere gentem.

...and from there a people and a king, haughty, proud and warlike,
would come to overthrow Libya; thus they overturned the Fates.
Saturn's daughter, dreading this and mindful of the ancient war
that she first waged at Troy for her beloved Greeks -
and, truly, not yet had the causes of her wrath and cruel resentment
left her soul; there remains stored deep in her mind 
the judgement of Paris and the insult to her scorned beauty
and the hated race and kidnapped Ganymede's honor:
inflamed by these upon the Trojans, tossed about across the sea,
the survivors of the Danxxx and of cruel Achilles,
she long kept them away from Latium, and through many years
they wandered, driven by the fates the whole sea round.
Of such a great millstone it was to found the Roman nation.


The Trojans leave Sicily and Juno begins to consider how to
prevent them from reaching Italy:

Vix e conspectu Siculae telluris in altum
uela dabant laeti et spumas salis aere ruebant, 35
cum Iuno aeternum seruans sub pectore uulnus
haec secum: 'mene incepto desistere uictam
nec posse Italia Teucrorum auertere regem!

Barely out of sight of Sicily upon the deep
the happy men paid out the sails and cut the salty foam with the prow,
when Juno ever guarding the wound under her breast
this to herself: Am I really defeated with what I have undertaken
and cannot turn the king of the Trojans away from Italy!

END
