X. ad Varum 

Varus me meus ad suos amores
visum duxerat e foro otiosum,
scortillum, ut mihi tum repente visum est,
non sane illepidum neque invenustum,
huc ut venimus, incidere nobis
sermones varii, in quibus, quid esset
iam Bithynia, quo modo se haberet,
et quonam mihi profuisset aere.
respondi id quod erat, nihil neque ipsis
nec praetoribus esse nec cohorti,
cur quisquam caput unctius referret,
praesertim quibus esset irrumator
praetor, nec faceret pili cohortem.
'at certe tamen,' inquiunt 'quod illic
natum dicitur esse, comparasti
ad lecticam homines.' ego, ut puellae
unum me facerem beatiorem,
'non' inquam 'mihi tam fuit maligne
ut, provincia quod mala incidisset,
non possem octo homines parare rectos.'


X. to Varus

My Varus had brought me, at leisure,
from the market to see his love, 
a whore, I thought when I first saw her,
not too ungraceful or uncomely.
When we got here, we fell to 
chatting, about: what's with
Bithynia these days, how's it holding up,
and had it somehow earned me brass.
I answered what was what, that there was nothing, not for the people
or the governors, or for their retinue,
why anyone would bring back an anointed head,
especially for those who have a dispicable
governor, who didn't get his retinue as much as a hair.
'But really now,' they say, didn't you 
collect men for your litter, for they
say that that's where that started.' I, to pass
myself off to the girl as the one better than everyone else
say 'it was not so grudging to me but,
because the province had fallen on hard times,
I couldn't contrive eight straight-backed men.

at mi nullus erat nec hic neque illic
fractum qui veteris pedem grabati
in collo sibi collocare posset.
hic illa, ut decuit cinaediorem,
'quaeso' inquit 'mihi, mi Catulle, paulum
istos commoda: nam volo ad Serapim
deferri.' 'mane' inquii puellae,
'istud quod modo dixeram me habere,
fugit me ratio: meus sodalis—
Cinna est Gaius—is sibi paravit.
verum, utrum illius an mei, quid ad me?
utor tam bene quam mihi pararim.
sed tu insulsa male et molesta vivis,
per quam non licet esse neglegentem.' 

START
AJC

But it was nothing to me neither here nor there
who the broken foot of the ancient pallet
could arrange on his neck.

Here she, as befit a hussy,
said, 'I ask for myself, my Catullus, 
lend me a few of your men: for I wish to Serapim
to be carried.' 'In the morning', I said to the girl,
'that which I had only said that I had,
reason has fled me: my companion -
Cinna is Gaius - he has readied himself.

In truth, whether of that or of mine, what's it to me?
I use/enjoy so much better then I could prepare myself.

But you live poorly by boring and tiresome girl something,
through which it is not permitted to be careless.

END
