XIV. ad Calvum poetam 

Ni te plus oculis meis amarem,
iucundissime Calve, munere isto
odissem te odio Vatiniano:
nam quid feci ego quidve sum locutus,
cur me tot male perderes poetis?
isti di mala multa dent clienti,
qui tantum tibi misit impiorum.
quod si, ut suspicor, hoc novum ac repertum
munus dat tibi Sulla litterator,
non est mi male, sed bene ac beate,
quod non dispereunt tui labores.
di magni, horribilem et sacrum libellum!
quem tu scilicet ad tuum Catullum
misti, continuo ut die periret,
Saturnalibus, optimo dierum!
non non hoc tibi, false, sic abibit.
nam si luxerit ad librariorum
curram scrinia, Caesios, Aquinos,
Suffenum, omnia colligam venena.
ac te his suppliciis remunerabor.
vos hinc interea valete abite
illuc, unde malum pedem attulistis,
saecli incommoda, pessimi poetae. 


XIV. to the poet Calvus

If I didn't love you more than my own eyes,
most agreeable Calvus, on account of that gift of yours
I would hate you as much as Vatinius does:
for what have I done, or what have I said,
that you have destroyed me so shamefully with poets?
May your gods bestow much harm on your client,
who sent to you so many scroundrels.
But if, as I suspect, this fresh and newly discovered 
gift was bestowed on you by the schoolmaster Sulla, 
I think it, not ill, but good and fortunate,
because your labors are not lost.

Great gods! What an awful and accursed book!
That you, naturally, sent to your Catullus,
so that he might pass straight away 
on Saturnalia, the best of days!
Oh no, this won't pass you by, you deceiver.
For as soon as the sun shines
I'll be running to the boxes of the
booksellers, to the Caesiuses, the Aquinuses,
Suffenus, I will collect all the venom.
And I will pay you back for this suffering.
And you all meanwhile, farewell, begone from here,
to the place from which you brought your ugly feet,
misfortunes to the age, the most wretched poets.


XIVb.

Si qui forte mearum ineptiarum
lectores eritis manusque vestras
non horrebitis admovere nobis,

If perchance any of you will be readers of my follies
and you will not dread to bring your hands near us,
