XVII. 

O Colonia, quae cupis ponte ludere longo,
et salire paratum habes, sed vereris inepta
crura ponticuli axulis stantis in redivivis,
ne supinus eat cavaque in palude recumbat:
sic tibi bonus ex tua pons libidine fiat,
in quo vel Salisubsali sacra suscipiantur,
munus hoc mihi maximi da, Colonia, risus.
quendam municipem meum de tuo volo ponte
ire praecipitem in lutum per caputque pedesque,
verum totius ut lacus putidaeque paludis
lividissima maximeque est profunda vorago.
insulsissimus est homo, nec sapit pueri instar
bimuli tremula patris dormientis in ulna.

O Cologna, you who want to stage sports on your causeway,
and have an deal for dancing, but are shy of the shaky
legs of the measly span erected on secondhand slats,
lest it fall flat and drop in the depths of the bog.
So may a bridge be made for you due to your desire,
on which even the holy prancing priests of Mars would be borne.
Give me, Cologna, this gift of greatest glee.
I want a certain townsman of mine to go from your bridge
head over heels, headlong into the mud, 
truly where of all the tide pool and the stinking bog
is the most leaden and lowest abyss.
The man is an ass, and has not the sense of a
two year old boy on the trembling arm of his sleeping father.

cui cum sit viridissimo nupta flore puella
et puella tenellulo delicatior haedo,
adservanda nigerrimis diligentius uuis,
ludere hanc sinit ut lubet, nec pili facit uni,
nec se subleuat ex sua parte, sed velut alnus
in fossa Liguri iacet suppernata securi,
tantundem omnia sentiens quam si nulla sit usquam;
talis iste meus stupor nil videt, nihil audit,
ipse qui sit, utrum sit an non sit, id quoque nescit.
nunc eum volo de tuo ponte mittere pronum,
si pote stolidum repente excitare veternum,
et supinum animum in gravi derelinquere caeno,
ferream ut soleam tenaci in voragine mula.

To whom, when he was the green bed, a girl bride
and a girl more tender than a goat kid,
who must be watched more closely than the darkest grapes,
it is permitted to play with her as she pleases, and not make of a hair to one,
and not lift him/herself up out of his/her role/part, but like an alder
lies in Ligurus' ditch lamed (f.) in the hip with an axe,
in all respects just like (him) feeling how if nothing were to be anywhere;
so great this stupidity of mine sees nothing, hears nothing,
itself which would be, whether or not it would be, it likewise knows not.

Now I wish him to cast headfirst off of your bridge,
if drunkenly stupid state of torpor suddenly were cause,
and to leave his heart/soul flat on his back in the dire mud,
while a she-mule .....some verb... an iron sandal by one clinging in a deep hole.
