LXIV. Argonautia et epythalamium Thetidis et Pelei

Peliaco quondam prognatae vertice pinus
dicuntur liquidas Neptuni nasse per undas
Phasidos ad fluctus et fines Aeetaeos,
cum lecti iuvenes, Argiuae robora pubis,
auratam optantes Colchis avertere pellem
ausi sunt vada salsa cita decurrere puppi,
caerula verrentes abiegnis aequora palmis.
diva quibus retinens in summis urbibus arces
ipsa levi fecit volitantem flamine currum,
pinea coniungens inflexae texta carinae.
illa rudem cursu prima imbuit Amphitriten;
quae simul ac rostro ventosum proscidit aequor
tortaque remigio spumis incanuit unda,
emersere freti candenti e gurgite vultus
aequoreae monstrum Nereides admirantes.
illa, atque alia, viderunt luce marinas
mortales oculis nudato corpore Nymphas
nutricum tenus exstantes e gurgite cano.
tum Thetidis Peleus incensus fertur amore,
tum Thetis humanos non despexit hymenaeos,
tum Thetidi pater ipse iugandum Pelea sensit.
o nimis optato saeclorum tempore nati
heroes, salvete, deum genus! o bona matrum
progenies, salvete iter...
vos ego saepe, meo vos carmine compellabo.
teque adeo eximie taedis felicibus aucte,
Thessaliae columen Peleu, cui Iuppiter ipse,
ipse suos divum genitor concessit amores;
tene Thetis tenuit pulcerrima Nereine?
tene suam Tethys concessit ducere neptem,
Oceanusque, mari totum qui amplectitur orbem?
quae simul optatae finito tempore luces
advenere, domum conventu tota frequentat
Thessalia, oppletur laetanti regia coetu:
dona ferunt prae se, declarant gaudia vultu.
deseritur Cieros, linquunt Pthiotica Tempe
Crannonisque domos ac moenia Larisaea,
Pharsalum coeunt, Pharsalia tecta frequentant.
rura colit nemo, mollescunt colla iuvencis,
non humilis curvis purgatur vinea rastris,
non glebam prono convellit vomere taurus,
non falx attenuat frondatorum arboris umbram,
squalida desertis rubigo infertur aratris.
ipsius at sedes, quacumque opulenta recessit
regia, fulgenti splendent auro atque argento.
candet ebur soliis, collucent pocula mensae,
tota domus gaudet regali splendida gaza.
pulvinar vero divae geniale locatur
sedibus in mediis, Indo quod dente politum
tincta tegit roseo conchyli purpura fuco.
haec vestis priscis hominum variata figuris
heroum mira virtutes indicat arte.

namque fluentisono prospectans litore Diae,
Thesea cedentem celeri cum classe tuetur
indomitos in corde gerens Ariadna furores,
necdum etiam sese quae visit visere credit,
utpote fallaci quae tum primum excita somno
desertam in sola miseram se cernat harena.
immemor at iuvenis fugiens pellit vada remis,
irrita ventosae linquens promissa procellae.
quem procul ex alga maestis Minois ocellis,
saxea ut effigies bacchantis, prospicit, eheu,
prospicit et magnis curarum fluctuat undis,
non flavo retinens subtilem vertice mitram,
non contecta levi velatum pectus amictu,
non tereti strophio lactentis vincta papillas,
omnia quae toto delapsa e corpore passim
ipsius ante pedes fluctus salis alludebant.
sed neque tum mitrae neque tum fluitantis amictus
illa vicem curans toto ex te pectore, Theseu,
toto animo, tota pendebat perdita mente.
misera, assiduis quam luctibus externavit
spinosas Erycina serens in pectore curas,
illa tempestate, ferox quo ex tempore Theseus
egressus curvis e litoribus Piraei
attigit iniusti regis Gortynia templa.
nam perhibent olim crudeli peste coactam
Androgeoneae poenas exsolvere caedis
electos iuvenes simul et decus innuptarum
Cecropiam solitam esse dapem dare Minotauro.
quis angusta malis cum moenia vexarentur,
ipse suum Theseus pro caris corpus Athenis
proicere optavit potius quam talia Cretam
funera Cecropiae nec funera portarentur.
atque ita nave levi nitens ac lenibus auris
magnanimum ad Minoa venit sedesque superbas.
hunc simul ac cupido conspexit lumine virgo
regia, quam suavis exspirans castus odores
lectulus in molli complexu matris alebat,
quales Eurotae praecingunt flumina myrtus
aurave distinctos educit verna colores,
non prius ex illo flagrantia declinavit
lumina, quam cuncto concepit corpore flammam
funditus atque imis exarsit tota medullis.
heu misere exagitans immiti corde furores
sancte puer, curis hominum qui gaudia misces,
quaeque regis Golgos quaeque Idalium frondosum,
qualibus incensam iactastis mente puellam
fluctibus, in flavo saepe hospite suspirantem!
quantos illa tulit languenti corde timores!
quanto saepe magis fulgore expalluit auri,
cum saevum cupiens contra contendere monstrum
aut mortem appeteret Theseus aut praemia laudis!

non ingrata tamen frustra munuscula divis
promittens tacito succepit vota labello.
nam velut in summo quatientem brachia Tauro
quercum aut conigeram sudanti cortice pinum
indomitus turbo contorquens flamine robur,
eruit (illa procul radicitus exturbata
prona cadit, late quaevis cumque obuia frangens,)
sic domito saevum prostravit corpore Theseus
nequiquam vanis iactantem cornua ventis.
inde pedem sospes multa cum laude reflexit
errabunda regens tenui vestigia filo,
ne labyrintheis e flexibus egredientem
tecti frustraretur inobservabilis error.

sed quid ego a primo digressus carmine plura
commemorem, ut linquens genitoris filia vultum,
ut consanguineae complexum, ut denique matris,
quae misera in gnata deperdita laeta
omnibus his Thesei dulcem praeoptarit amorem:
aut ut vecta rati spumosa ad litora Diae
aut ut eam devinctam lumina somno
liquerit immemori discedens pectore coniunx?
saepe illam perhibent ardenti corde furentem
clarisonas imo fudisse e pectore voces,
ac tum praeruptos tristem conscendere montes,
unde aciem in pelagi vastos protenderet aestus,
tum tremuli salis adversas procurrere in undas
mollia nudatae tollentem tegmina surae,
atque haec extremis maestam dixisse querellis,
frigidulos udo singultus ore cientem:

'sicine me patriis avectam, perfide, ab aris
perfide, deserto liquisti in litore, Theseu?
sicine discedens neglecto numine divum,
immemor a! devota domum periuria portas?
nullane res potuit crudelis flectere mentis
consilium? tibi nulla fuit clementia praesto,
immite ut nostri vellet miserescere pectus?

at non haec quondam blanda promissa dedisti
voce mihi, non haec miserae sperare iubebas,
sed conubia laeta, sed optatos hymenaeos,
quae cuncta aereii discerpunt irrita venti.
nunc iam nulla viro iuranti femina credat,
nulla viri speret sermones esse fideles;
quis dum aliquid cupiens animus praegestit apisci,
nil metuunt iurare, nihil promittere parcunt:
sed simul ac cupidae mentis satiata libido est,
dicta nihil metuere, nihil periuria curant.
certe ego te in medio versantem turbine leti
eripui, et potius germanum amittere crevi,
quam tibi fallaci supremo in tempore dessem.
pro quo dilaceranda feris dabor alitibusque
praeda, neque iniacta tumulabor mortua terra.
quaenam te genuit sola sub rupe leaena,
quod mare conceptum spumantibus exspuit undis,
quae Syrtis, quae Scylla rapax, quae vasta Carybdis,
talia qui reddis pro dulci praemia vita? 

si tibi non cordi fuerant conubia nostra,
saeva quod horrebas prisci praecepta parentis,
attamen in vestras potuisti ducere sedes,
quae tibi iucundo famularer serva labore,
candida permulcens liquidis vestigia lymphis,
purpureave tuum consternens veste cubile.

sed quid ego ignaris nequiquam conquerar auris,
externata malo, quae nullis sensibus auctae
nec missas audire queunt nec reddere voces?
ille autem prope iam mediis versatur in undis,
nec quisquam apparet vacua mortalis in alga.
sic nimis insultans extremo tempore saeva
fors etiam nostris invidit questibus auris.
Iuppiter omnipotens, utinam ne tempore primo
Gnosia Cecropiae tetigissent litora puppes,
indomito nec dira ferens stipendia tauro
perfidus in Cretam religasset navita funem,
nec malus hic celans dulci crudelia forma
consilia in nostris requiesset sedibus hospes!
nam quo me referam? quali spe perdita nitor?
Idaeosne petam montes? at gurgite lato
discernens ponti truculentum dividit aequor.
an patris auxilium sperem? quemne ipsa reliqui
respersum iuvenem fraterna caede secuta?
coniugis an fido consoler memet amore?
quine fugit lentos incuruans gurgite remos?
praeterea nullo colitur sola insula tecto,
nec patet egressus pelagi cingentibus undis.
nulla fugae ratio, nulla spes: omnia muta,
omnia sunt deserta, ostentant omnia letum.
non tamen ante mihi languescent lumina morte,
nec prius a fesso secedent corpore sensus,
quam iustam a divis exposcam prodita multam
caelestumque fidem postrema comprecer hora.
quare facta virum multantes vindice poena
Eumenides, quibus anguino redimita capillo
frons exspirantis praeportat pectoris iras,
huc huc adventate, meas audite querellas,
quas ego, vae misera, extremis proferre medullis
cogor inops, ardens, amenti caeca furore.
quae quoniam verae nascuntur pectore ab imo,
vos nolite pati nostrum vanescere luctum,
sed quali solam Theseus me mente reliquit,
tali mente, deae, funestet seque suosque.'

has postquam maesto profudit pectore voces,
supplicium saevis ecens anxia factis,
annuit invicto caelestum numine rector;
quo motu tellus atque horrida contremuerunt
aequora concussitque micantia sidera mundus.
ipse autem caeca mentem caligine Theseus
consitus oblito dimisit pectore cuncta,
quae mandata prius constanti mente tenebat,
dulcia nec maesto sustollens signa parenti
sospitem Erechtheum se ostendit visere portum.
namque ferunt olim, classi cum moenia divae
linquentem gnatum ventis concrederet Aegeus,
talia complexum iuveni mandata dedisse:

'gnate mihi longa iucundior unice vita,
gnate, ego quem in dubios cogor dimittere casus,
reddite in extrema nuper mihi fine senectae,
quandoquidem fortuna mea ac tua feruida virtus
eripit invito mihi te, cui languida nondum
lumina sunt gnati cara saturata figura,
non ego te gaudens laetanti pectore mittam,
nec te ferre sinam fortunae signa secundae,
sed primum multas expromam mente querellas,
canitiem terra atque infuso puluere foedans,
inde infecta vago suspendam lintea malo,
nostros ut luctus nostraeque incendia mentis
carbasus obscurata decet ferrugine Hibera.
quod tibi si sancti concesserit incola Itoni,
quae nostrum genus ac sedes defendere Erecthei
annuit, ut tauri respergas sanguine dextram,
tum vero facito ut memori tibi condita corde
haec vigeant mandata, nec ulla oblitteret aetas;
ut simul ac nostros invisent lumina collis,
funestam antennae deponant undique vestem,
candidaque intorti sustollant vela rudentes,
quam primum cernens ut laeta gaudia mente
agnoscam, cum te reducem aetas prospera sistet.'


haec mandata prius constanti mente tenentem
Thesea ceu pulsae ventorum flamine nubes
aereum nivei montis liquere cacumen.
at pater, ut summa prospectum ex arce petebat,
anxia in assiduos absumens lumina fletus,
cum primum infecti conspexit lintea veli,
praecipitem sese scopulorum e vertice iecit,
amissum credens immiti Thesea fato.
sic funesta domus ingressus tecta paterna
morte ferox Theseus, qualem Minoidi luctum
obtulerat mente immemori, talem ipse recepit.
quae tum prospectans cedentem maesta carinam
multiplices animo voluebat saucia curas.

at parte ex alia florens volitabat Iacchus
cum thiaso Satyrorum et Nysigenis Silenis,
te quaerens, Ariadna, tuoque incensus amore.
* * * * * * * *


quae tum alacres passim lymphata mente furebant
euhoe bacchantes, euhoe capita inflectentes.
harum pars tecta quatiebant cuspide thyrsos,
pars e divolso iactabant membra iuvenco,
pars sese tortis serpentibus incingebant,
orgia quae frustra cupiunt audire profani;
plangebant aliae proceris tympana palmis,
aut tereti tenuis tinnitus aere ciebant;
multis raucisonos efflabant cornua bombos
barbaraque horribili stridebat tibia cantu.
talibus amplifice vestis decorata figuris
pulvinar complexa suo velabat amictu.

quae postquam cupide spectando Thessala pubes
expleta est, sanctis coepit decedere divis.
hic, qualis flatu placidum mare matutino
horrificans Zephyrus procliuas incitat undas,
Aurora exoriente vagi sub limina Solis,
quae tarde primum clementi flamine pulsae
procedunt leviterque sonant plangore cachinni,
post vento crescente magis magis increbescunt,
purpureaque procul nantes ab luce refulgent:
sic tum vestibuli linquentes regia tecta
ad se quisque vago passim pede discedebant.

quorum post abitum princeps e vertice Pelei
advenit Chiron portans siluestria dona:
nam quoscumque ferunt campi, quos Thessala magnis
montibus ora creat, quos propter fluminis undas
aura parit flores tepidi fecunda Favoni,
hos indistinctis plexos tulit ipse corollis,
quo permulsa domus iucundo risit odore.
confestim Penios adest, viridantia Tempe,
Tempe, quae silvae cingunt super impendentes,
Minosim linquens doris celebranda choreis,
non vacuos: namque ille tulit radicitus altas
fagos ac recto proceras stipite laurus,
non sine nutanti platano lentaque sorore
flammati Phaethontis et aerea cupressu.
haec circum sedes late contexta locavit,
vestibulum ut molli velatum fronde vireret.
post hunc consequitur sollerti corde Prometheus,
extenuata gerens veteris vestigia poenae,
quam quondam silici restrictus membra catena
persolvit pendens e verticibus praeruptis.


LXIV. The Argonauts and the nuptials of Thetis and Peleus.

Once upon a time pines sprung from Pelion's peak
are said to have floated through Neptune's clear waves
to Phasidos' tides and  Aeetaeos' lands,
when the chosen youths, the young oaks of Argos,
seeking to snatch Colchis' gilded pelt,
dared to shoot briny channels with their swift ship,
sweeping the deep blue surface of the sea with fir oars.
The goddess who preserves the strongholds at the summits of cities
herself made the craft flying on a light breeze,
joining the curved keel with a web of pine.
It gave the first lesson to unschooled Amphitrite;
who, soon as it cut the windy surface of the sea with its prow
and bent with rowing whitened by the froth of the wave,
the faces of the Nereides rose up out of the gleaming white whirlpools
of the strait, marveling at the portent of the sea.
On that very day, mortal men saw by daylight, with their eyes,
the sea-born Nymphs with bodies laid bare 
to the breasts, showing above the white whirlpool.
Then fiery Peleus is brought to love Thetis,
then Thetis did not despise human marriage,
then the Thetis' father himself deemed her union with Peleus.
In the time of the ages too well desired,
hail, heroes, a race born of the gods! 
O, best progeny of mothers, hail...
I will often call upon you in my prayer.
And I approach thee, much increased, with fruitful torches,
Peleus, the pillar of Thessalia, to whom Jupiter himself,
the father of the gods himself, yielded his beloved;
Did not Thetis, most beautiful of the Nerines, hold you fast?
Did not Tethys allow you to escort her granddaughter,
and also Ocean, with the sea that encircles the whole world?
As soon as the chosen days arrived, 
all Thessalia throngs the house,
the palace is filled with rejoicing company:
they bear gifts before them, they show joy in their looks.
Cieros is deserted, they forsake Pthiotican Tempe
and the houses of Crannon and the walls of Larisa,
they assemble at Pharsalus, they throng the houses of Pharsalia.
No one tends the farms, the necks of the bullocks turn soft,
the low-lying vine is not cleared by the bent hoe,
the bull does not dislodge a clod with an inclined plow, 
the pruner's knife does not thin the shade of the trees,
and filthy rust is carried in by abandoned plows.
But this habitation, in the recesses of the opulent palace,
glistens with gleaming gold and silver.
Ivory brightens the chairs, the table's goblets glitter,
the whole house rejoices with splendid royal treasure.
The sacred nuptial couch in truth is placed
in the middle of the palace, polished like Indian ivory -
a purple cloth covers it with the rosy dye of the murex.
This garment, patterned with ancient figures of men,
with marvelous skill shows the heroes' courage.

For gazing out over the wave-beaten shore of Dia,
Ariadne, bearing untamable passions in her heart,
beholds Theseus departing with his swift fleet
and even yet she does not trust herself to look at what she sees,
as when she was first woken from a deceitful sleep
sees herself, alone, abandoned on the strand.
Forgetful youth, fleeing, strikes the sea with his oars,
forsaking his vain promises to the windy tempest.
Minos' daughter's gazes at him, from afar, with sorrowful eyes,
from the rocky seaweed, gazes like an effigy of a Bacchanite, alas!
and she heaves in great waves of troubles,
not restraining her delicate headdress with her red-gold whirlpool,
her veiled breast not covered by her thin mantle,
her milky teats not bound by a smooth breastband,
all of which, having slipped away from her body every which way
the waves of the sea played with before her feet.
But she, caring naught for either her headdress or her flowing mantle,
completely from her heart, Theseus,
she hung on you with all her soul, all her ruined mind.
Wretched woman, how she is beside herself with unending sorrows,
Venus sowing thorny cares in her breast
from that time that warlike Theseus
having set sail from the arching shores of Piraceus
arrived at the Gortynian temples of the unjust king.
For they long have said that by a cruel pestilence
Athens was forced to pay the penalty for the slaying of Androgeos,
selected youths together with the pick of the maidens
they were wont to give as a feast to the Minotaur.
When his narrow city walls were plagued by these evils,
Theseus, of his own accord, for his dear Athens
chose to throw away his body so that the unburied corpses 
of Athenians would no longer be borne to Crete.
And so with a swift ship forging on and with gentle breezes
he came to noble Minos and his haughty habitations.
The royal maiden saw him at once and in a loving light,
whom her chaste couch nourished in a mother's soft embrace,
breathing out sweet perfumes,
just as the rivers of Eurotas engender the myrtles
or the spring breeze draws out the separate colors,
before she could turn her burning eyes from him,
with all her body she conceived a flame
utterly and inwardly she blazed in her whole marrow.
Alas! divine boy, stirring up passions with a cruel heart,
have mercy, you who blend joys with the cares of men,
and you queen of Golgos and of leafy Idalium,
to what billows have you tossed the lass, with mind afire,
sighing often on her fair-haired guest!
She bore such dreads in her weary heart!
How often did she grow more pale than the gleam of gold,
since Theseus, wishing to strive against a ferocious monster,
would seek either death or the rewards of renown!

Yet promising not unacceptable small gifts to the gods,
and not in vain, with a silent little lip she made her vows.
For, just as the untamed whirlwind, twisting the tree in a gale,
uproots an oak shaking its branches on the summit of Mt Taurus,
or a cone-bearing pine with its sweating bark.
(Driven far from its roots, it falls flat, 
shattering, far and wide, whatever is in the way.)
In this way Theseus overthrew the savage in its mastered flesh
that jerked its horns in vain to the empty winds.
From there the unharmed man bent back his foot with much praise,
guiding his wandering steps with the slender thread,
to keep the maze from frustrating his exit from 
the labyrinthine and hard to track windings of the shelter.

But why should I myself, having first digressed from my poem, 
remember more, such as a daughter leaving the face of her father,
the embrace of a sister, or indeed of a mother,
wretched for a joyful lost daughter
who prefers the sweet love of Theseus to all these things:
Or how she came, borne by ship, to the foaming shore of Dia,
or how her spouse, departing with his heedless heart,
left her with her eyes bound fast by sleep?

They often say that she, maddened by her burning soul,
had poured shrill voices out of her inmost breast,
and that the sad woman now climbed up steep mountains,
whence she could stretch her gaze to the vast seething of the sea,
then rushed into the advancing waves of trembling salt,
lifting the delicate coverings from her calves,
and that the sorrowing lady said this, in her dying complaints,
driving the cold sobs with her tearful mouth:

'Did you thus abandon me, faithless man, on the deserted shore
faithless man, carried off from my father's house, Theseus?
Do you, departing thus in disregard of the divine will of the gods,
Ah heedless man! carry falsely sworn oaths home?
Could nothing appease the intention of a cruel mind?
Was there no mercy for you at hand
that your harsh heart might wish to have compassion for ours?
But these were not the fawning promises you voiced
to me of old. You led my poor self to hope not for this,
but for wedded bliss and a wished for match,
all empty air that the winds tear to bits.
Let no woman now trust a man's oaths,
let her not hope that a man's words are true;
as long as that lusting soul yearns to get laid,
never do they fear to swear falsely, or spare their promises.
But as soon as the desire of a lecherous mind was satisfied,
no more did they fear speech, or care about false oaths.
Surely I rescued you, spinning in the middle of a death's whirl,
and I had determined rather to to lose my own kin
than to neglect your deceitful self in the ultimate hour.
For which I'll be given as prey to be torn to pieces by wild beasts
and birds, and not, when dead, be entombed with earth laid on.
What lioness gave birth to you, alone beneath a rock,
what sea did spit you out, conceived in frothing waves,
which Sytis, which grasping Scylla, which monstrous Carybdis,
you who give such rewards in return for your sweet life?
Had our marriage not been to your liking
because you bristled at the cruel rules of your stern father,
you could still conduct into your family's home
one who, as a servant, would attend you in a pleasing toil,
caressing your pale feet with clear water,
covering your couch with a purple blanket.

But why do I, frightened by evil, lament in vain to
the unmindful breezes, which, endowed with no senses,
can neither hear sounds sent out nor send them back?
But he already wheels about in the midst of the waves,
and no mortal man is seen in the empty wrack.
Thus, even cruel fortune mocking so in my extremity
begrudged her ears to our complaints.
Almighty Jupiter, had but the the ships
of Cecropia never touched the Gnosian shore,
bearing awful tributes to the ungovernable bull,
or had the faithless sailor never moored in Crete,
or had the evil guest, hiding hard-hearted plans in a charming countenance,
never reposed here within our home!
For where could I return to?  On what hope can I, abandoned, rely on?
Should I make for the mountains of Ida?  But from the broad gulf,
marking off the ferocious surface of the sea, separates us.
Or could I hope for a father's aid?  Whom I myself abandoned, 
following a youth splattered with my brother's slaughter?
Or could I console myself with the faithful love of a husband?
Who flees from the gulf, bending his pliant oars?
Moreover, this lonely island is not tenanted with any shelter,
nor does a passage of the sea lie open to the encircling waves.
No way to flee, no hope, everything silent,
Everything is desolate, everything shows ruin.
But my eyes will not grow dim with death,
nor will my senses slip from my wearied body,
before I, betrayed, demand a just penalty of the gods 
and implore the trust of the heavens in my last hour.
Therefore Furies, who avenge the deeds of men with a champion penalty, 
whose brows, encircled with hair like hissing serpents,
bear the rages of my heart before you,
here, here approach, hear my grievances,
which I, alas, poor wretch, am urged to profer from my inmost marrow, 
helpless, burning, blinded by frantic rage.
Because these sorrows are begotten from my inmost heart,
you must refuse to allow our grief to fade,
but just as with his soul did Theseus abandon me to solitude,
so let him with his soul, o goddesses, pollute by murder himself and his own.'

After she poured out these speeches with a dejected heart,
humbly imploring, troubled by savage deeds,
the celestial ruler nodded assent with his invincible will;
at which movement the earth and the frightful sea did quake
and the firmament shook the gleaming stars.
While Theseus himself, beset with a dark murk, 
dismissed from his mind with a forgetful heart all
the commands that he once held in a steadfast mind,
and raising not the sweet signals for his sorrowing father
to show himself safe and sound to visit Erechtheus' port.
For they report of old, when Aegeus consigned his son,
forsaken from the walls of the goddess to the winds and the fleet,
he gave an embrace and such commands to the young man:

'My only son, dearer to me than a long life,
son, whom I am compelled to send away into dangerous plights,
you who recently returned from the ends of the earth to me, in old age,
since my fortune and your hot-blooded courage
snatches you away from me, whose dull eyes are
not yet sated by the precious form of my son,
I'll not send you off with a rejoicing heart,
nor will I allow the omens of good forture to bear you away,
but I'll first display many complaints in my mind,
disgracing my gray hair with dirt and dust poured on,
then I'll hang dyed sails by the swaying mast,
so that the rusty dark Iberian canvas matches
our griefs and the fires of our mind.
But if one who lives in holy Itonus yields to you,
and assents to defend our family and the house of Athens,
so that you bestrew your right hand with the blood of the bull,
then truly, make these commands flourish in your memory,
nor let any time blot them out;
so that the instant that your eyes spy our hills,
let them take down the yardarm's mourning garb from every side,
and let the twisted sheets raise white bellowing sails,
so that at first sight I might discern joyous delights in my mind,
as a favorable age fixes your redemption.'

These commands, that Theseus had kept before with a steadfast mind,
left him, just as the clouds, beaten by the gale of the winds,
leave the lofty peak of the snowy mountain.
But his father, as he stood lookout at the top of the peak,
wasting his anxious eyes in unrelenting weeping,
had no sooner spied the billowing sails of dyed linen,
than he hurled himself headlong from the summit of the cliff,
believing Theseus lost through cruel fate.
So warlike Theseus, entering his paternal home, 
mourning and polluted by murder, 
himself received grief, through his forgetful mind,
as great as that he'd given to Minos' daughter.
Who, the melancholy woman gazing out at the receding hull,
was then rolling her many cares about in her wounded soul.

But from another part blooming Bacchus flew
with the dance of the satyrs and Silenus from Nysa,
seeking you, Ariadna, and inflamed by love for you.

The eager whooping Bacchantes, bowing their whooping heads
went raging here and there with frenzied minds.
Some of them shook the their staffs, tipped with blades,
some scattered limbs ripped from a calf,
some wrapped themselves with twisted snakes,
some celebrated the rites in dark caves,
the rites that the uninitiated long in vain to hear.
Others struck their drums with upraised palms,
or started up delicate jinglings with polished brass.
The horns of many blew raucous buzzings 
and a barbarous flute buzzed out a dreadful tune.
The blanket, splendidly adorned with such figures,
enveloped the couch in an embrace of its folds.

After zealously watching this all of Thessalia 
was satisfied, and withdrew to cede their place to the sacred gods.
Now, a western breeze, ruffling the gentle sea
with a morning waft, urges the leaning waves on,
with the breaking dawn rising under the threshold of the roving sun.
The waves advance, slowing at first, driven by a gentle breeze,
and lightly sound with a stroke of laughter,
then they surge higher and higher under the rising wind,
and floating far off, glisten in the rosy dawn:
so then did they depart the royal court,
they left for their own homes, with each one walking a different way.

After they were gone, Chiron came first from Pelion's peak,
bearing gifts of the woodland:
whatever, indeed, the fields produce, what the Thessalian shore bears
with its great mountains, what flowers that the fertile breeze brings forth
from the warm West Wind, on account of the river's waves,
he carried these, woven into tangled garlands,
by which the beguiled house laughed with a pleasant scent.
Suddenly the Peneus arrives, from the green Tempe valley, 
Tempe, whose overhanging forests wreathe overhead,
leaving the Naiads to be praised in dorian meters,
not empty-handed, for indeed he, carried, tall beech trees,
roots and all, and straight, lofty laurels by a branch,
not without the nodding plane-tree or her pliant sister
of flaming Phaethon, or the airy cypress-tree.
These he placed here and there, entwined around the seats,
so that the court would be green, shaded with soft foliage.
After this Prometheus follows with a ready heart,
bearing faint traces of the ancient punishment
that he once suffered, with his limbs chained to a rock,
dangling from the rugged cliffs.


inde pater divum sancta cum coniuge natisque
advenit caelo, te solum, Phoebe, relinquens
unigenamque simul cultricem montibus Idri:
Pelea nam tecum pariter soror aspernata est,
nec Thetidis taedas voluit celebrare iugales.
qui postquam niveis flexerunt sedibus artus
large multiplici constructae sunt dape mensae,
cum interea infirmo quatientes corpora motu
veridicos Parcae coeperunt edere cantus.
his corpus tremulum complectens undique vestis
candida purpurea talos incinxerat ora,
at roseae niveo residebant vertice vittae,
aeternumque manus carpebant rite laborem.
laeva colum molli lana retinebat amictum,
dextera tum leviter deducens fila supinis
formabat digitis, tum prono in pollice torquens
libratum tereti versabat turbine fusum,
atque ita decerpens aequabat semper opus dens,
laneaque aridulis haerebant morsa labellis,
quae prius in levi fuerant exstantia filo:

From there the father ... divine with holy matrimony and children
comes/came by the sky, you alone, Diana, leaving
and your sister like the devotee from the mountains of Idrum:
for Pelea with you equally sister was scorned,
and not of Theta he wishes to celebrate nuptial pine torches.

Those who after bent with snowy seats of art
exceedingly compound were constructed by the feast of the table,
when/with meanwhile by/to the sick man bodies shaking for to move
they began to pour forth truthful songs of Fate.

by/to these the trembling body embracing from every side by/to the garments
bright purple coast had wrapped the ankles
but they resided by/to the snowy peak of a rosy ribbon,
and the hands seized the eternal toil solemnly.

by the left hand s/he was holding fast distaff by/to soft wool cloak,
with the right then lightly drawing threads by flat on one's back/palm up
she was forming with fingers then prone in thumb twisting
she was spinning the spindle, swung with a smooth whirl,
and so snipping she levels always the work, lacking,
and the woolen bitten things were clinging with dry lips,
that earlier the visible things were in a thin thread:
