A. Caesaris dictatoris honores immodici

Caesar vero moderationem clementiamque cum in administratione tum
in victoria belli civilis admirabilem exhibuit.  Nam cunctis
inimicis in Italiam redire permisit magistratusque et imperia
capere; et statuas Lucii Sullae atque Pompeii a plebe disiectas
reposuit; ac si qua aut cogitarentur gravius adversus se aut
dicerentur, inhibere maluit quam vindicare.  Praegravant tamen
cetera facta dictaque eius, ut et abusus dominatione et iure caesus
existimetur.  Non enim honores modo nimios recepit: continuum
consulatum, perpetuam dictaturam, praefecturamque morum, insuper
praenomen Imperatoris, cognomen Patris Patriae, statuam inter
reges; sed et ampliora etiam humano fastigio decerni sibi passus
est; sedem auream in curia et pro tribunali, templa, aras,
simulacra iuxta deos, pulvinar, flaminem, lupercos, appellationem
mensis e suo nomine; ac nullos non honores ad libidinem cepit et
dedit.  Quae omnia praecipuam et exitiabilem ei invidiam moverunt.

Neque infamiam affectati regii nominis discutere valuit, quamquam
et plebi regem se salutanti Caesarem se, non regem, esse respondit
et Lupercalibus pro rostris a consule Antonio admotum saepius
capiti suo diadema reppulit atque in Capitolium Iovi Optimo Maximo
misit.


The excessive honors of the dictator Caesar

In truth, Caesar exhibited admirable moderation and mercy, not only
in his administration but also with regard to his victory in the
civil war.  For he allowed all of his enemies to return to Italy
and keep their magistracies and authority; and restored the statues
of Lucius Sulla and Pompey that had been destroyed by the plebians;
and if anything serious was thought or said against him, he
preferred to nip it in the bud rather than to take vengeance for
it.  Nevertheless the other things that he did and said outweighed
these, so that both abuse of power and execution were justly
considered.  For the honors that he accepted were not only
excessive: a continuous consulship, a perpetual dictatorship, and
the management of morals, in addition to a first name of
Commander-in-chief, a second name of Father of the Fatherland, and
a statue among the kings; but he even allowed more to be
settled on him, things too great for a mortal man; a golden chair
in the senate and before the tribunal, temples, altars, god-like
images, a deity's couch, attendant priests, a month named after
him; and there were no honors he did not accept and grant at will.
All of which provoked a hatred that was particularly deadly to him.

But he was unable to shake the infamy of aspiring to a royal name,
even though he responded to the commoners who saluted him as
'king', with "'Caesar', not 'king'", and when the consul Antony
approached him in the Forum at Lupercalia, he thrust the diadem
away from his head several times and sent it to the Capitoline Hill
to Jove the Greatest and Best.


B. Ciceronis in Antonium invectio

Sed nunc ad Lupercalia veniamus.  Sedebat in rostris collega tuus,
amictus toga purpurea, in sella aurea, coronatus.  Escendis,
accedis ad sellam, diadema ostendis.  Gemitus toto foro.  Unde
diadema?  Non enim abiectum sustuleras, sed attuleras domo
meditatum et cogitatum scelus.  Tu diadema imponebas cum plangore
populi; ille cum plausu reiciebat.  Tu ergo unus, scelerate,
inventus es qui auctor regni esses eumque quem collegam habebas
dominum habere velles.  Supplex te ad pedes abiciebas.  Quid
petens? ut servires?  0 praeclaram illam eloquentiam tuam, cum es
nudus contionatus!  Ita eras lupercus ut te consulem esse meminisse
deberes!  Quid hoc turpius?  Quid foedius?  Quid suppliciis omnibus
dignius?  Quid indignius quam vivere eum qui imposuerit diadema,
cum omnes fateantur iure interfectum esse qui abiecerit?  At etiam
inscribi iussit in fastis ad Lupercalia: Gaio Caesari dictatori
perpetuo Marcum Antonium consulem, populi iussu, regnum detulisse;
Caesarem uti noluisse.  Ideone Lucius Tarquinius exactus, ut multis
post saeculis a Marco Antonio, quod fas non est, rex Romae
constitueretur?


Cicero's invective against Anthony

But let us now come to the Lupercalia.  Your colleague was sitting on
the rostra, cloaked in a purple toga, in a golden chair, wearing a
garland.  You ascend, approach the chair, hold out a crown.  A
groan passes through the entire forum.  Where did the crown come
from?  For it hadn't been thrown away for you to pick up, but you
had carried it from home, having planned and pondered the crime.
You'd place the crown as the people cried out; he'd refuse it to
their applause.  Therefore you alone, criminal, were found to be a
supporter of royal power, and that you wished to think that the man
whom you held as a colleague would be the master.  Kneeling, you
humbled yourself at his feet.  Asking for what?  to be his slave?
O, that famous eloquence of yours, while you made a speech in the
nude!  Although you were a Lupercus, you still ought to have
remembered that you were a consul!  What is more disgraceful than
this?  What is fouler?  What more apt for every punishment?  What
more shameful than for the man who had placed the crown to survive,
while all acknowledged that the man who had cast it away had been
legally killed?  And yet he ordered this to be inscribed in the
calendar under 'Lupercalia': that by the acclaim of the people, the
consul Mark Anthony had granted royal power to the perpetual
dictator Gaius Caesar; and that Caesar had been unwilling to make
use of it.  Therefore, was Lucius Tarquinius driven out, so that
many generations later, contrary to divine will, a king of Rome
could be established by Mark Anthony?
