Caedes Remi

Vox fuit haec regis: "Condenti, Iuppiter, urbem,
 et genitor Mavors Vestaque mater, ades;
quosque pium est adhibere deos, advertite cuncti.
 Auspicibus vobis hoc mihi surgat opus.
Longa sit huic aetas dominaeque potentia terrae,
 sitque sub hac oriens occiduusque dies."
Ille precabatur; tonitru dedit omina laevo
 Iuppiter et laevo fulmina missa polo.
Augurio laeti iaciunt fundamina cives,
 et novus exiguo tempore murus erat.
Hoc Celer urget opus, quem Romulus ipse vocarat,
 "Sint" que, "Celer, curae" dixerat "ista tuae;
neve quis aut muros aut factam vomere fossam
 transeat; audentem talia dede neci." 
Quod Remus ignorans humiles contemnere muros
 coepit, et "his populus" dicere "tutus erit?"
Nec mora; transiluit. Rutro Celer occupat ausum.
 Ille premit duram sanguinolentus humum.
Haec ubi rex didicit, lacrimas introrsus obortas
 devorat et clausum pectore vulnus habet.
Flere palam non vult exemplaque fortia servat;
 "Sic" que "meos muros transeat hostis" ait.


The end of Remus

This was the voice of the king: "For founding a city, Jupiter
 and Father Mars and Mother Vesta, attend me;
all you gods whom it is pious to summon, turn to me.
 Under your auspices this work rises to me.
Long be the lifetime of it, and the power for our mistress land,
 and may the day be within this, rising and setting."
He supplicated: Jupiter bestowed omens with thunder on the left
 and on the left bolts of lightning were cast in the sky.
At the augury the joyful citizens laid down the foundations,
 and in no time at all, there was a new wall.
Celer cheers on this work, that Romulus himself had called for,
 and he said, "Let those things be your own concern;
and let no-one cross either the walls or the ditch that was fashioned
 with the plow; bestow death on any who dares such a thing."
But Remus didn't know this, he began to scorn the humble walls
 and say "Will the nation be protected by these?"
And without a pause; he leapt across.  With a shovel Celer attacks the bold one.
 Blood-stained, he strikes him down on the hard ground.
When the king learned of this, he swallowed the tears flowing
  inside him and held the wound shut up in his heart.
He was unwilling to weep openly and guarded steadfast examples;
 and said, "Thus may the enemy cross my walls".
