A. Hannibalis exitus

Hannibal, postquam est nuntiatum milites regios in vestibulo esse
et sensit se fugere non posse, venenum, quod multo ante
praeparatum ad tales habebat casus, poposcit.  "Liberemus,"
inquit, "diuturna cura populum Romanum, quando mortem senis
exspectare longum censent.  Nec magnam nec memorabilem ex inermi
proditoque Flamininus victoriam feret."  Hospitales deinde deos
violatae a rege Prusia fidei testes invocans, poculum exhausit.
Hic vitae exitus fuit Hannibalis.

The death of Hannibal

Hannibal, after he was told that the king's soldiers were at the
entrance and he realized that he could not escape, asked for
the poison that he had long readied against such an emergency.
"May we free", he said, "the Roman people from a long lasting
concern, since they think that the death of an old man is a
tedious affair.  And Flamininus will win neither a great nor a
memorable victory from a defenseless and betrayed man."  Then
calling upon the hospitable gods to bear witness to the good
faith violated by King Prusias, he drained the cup.  This was the
end of Hannibal's life.


B. Hannibalis exemplum gloriae vanitatem declarat

Expende Hannibalem; quot libras in duce summo invenies?  Hic est,
quem non capit Africa Mauro percussa oceano Niloque admota
tepenti, rursus ad Aethiopum populos aliosque elephantos.
Additur imperiis Hispania; Pyrenaeum transilit.  Opposuit natura
Alpemque nivemque; diducit scopulos et montem rumpit aceto.  Iam
tenet Italiam, tamen ultra pergere tendit. "Acti," inquit, "nihil
est, nisi Poeno milite portas frangimus et media vexillum pono
Subura."  O qualis facies et quali digna tabella, cum Gaetula
ducem portaret belua luscum!  Exitus ergo quis est?  O gloria!
Vincitur idem nempe et in exsilium praeceps fugit atque ibi
magnus mirandusque cliens sedet ad praetoria regis donec Bithyno
libeat vigilare tyranno.  Finem animae, quae res humanas miscuit
olim, non gladii, non saxa dabunt, nec tela, sed ille Cannarum
vindex et tanti sanguinis ultor anulus. I demens, et saevas curre
per Alpes, ut pueris placeas et declamatio fias.


Hannibal's example of glory is revealed as vanity

Weigh Hannibal; how many pounds will you discover in the ultimate
leader?  That is, he whom Africa, pierced by the Moorish ocean
and bordering the warming Nile and the Ethiopian people and
elephants, can not contain.  When Spain is placed under his
commmand; he leaps over the Pyrenees.  Nature placed the snowy
Alps in his way; he split boulders and broke a mountain with
vinegar.  He now holds Italy, yet strains to proceed beyond it.
"There is no success," he says, unless we shatter the gates with
Punic troops and I plant my flag in the middle of Subura."  O,
won't you do so well, worthy of such a picture, when the
Gaetulian beast carries a one-eyed leader.  And so, what's the
outcome of this?  What price glory? The same man is defeated, of
course and flees headlong into exile and there as a great and
marvelous vassal might remain in the king's headquarters until it
pleases the Bithynian tyrant to wake.  Neither sword nor stone
nor spear will grant an end to the life that once confounded
civilized affairs, But a small ring will give it to that defender
of Cannae and avenger of such great kin.  Go, madman, and race
through the savage Alps, that you might please the boys and
become a school speech.
