De Sullae natura cultuque

Ceterum dum ea res geritur, L. Sulla quaestor cum magno equitatu
in castra Romanorum venit.  Sed quoniam nos tanti viri res
admonuit, idoneum visum est de natura cultuque eius paucis dicere.
Neque enim alio loco de Sullae rebus dicturi sumus?  et
L. Sisenna, optume et diligentissume omnium qui eas res dixere
persecutus, parum mihi libero ore locutus videtur.

Igitur Sulla gentis patriciae nobilis fuit, familia prope iam
extincta maiorum ignavia; litteris Graecis et Latinis iuxta atque
doctissume eruditus; animo ingenti; cupidus voluptatum sed gloriae
cupidior; otio luxurioso esse; tamen ab negotiis numquam voluptas
remorata, nisi quod de uxore potuit honestius consuli; facundus,
callidus, et amicitia facilis; ad simulanda negotia altitudo
ingeni incredibilis; multarum rerum ac maxume pecuniae largitor.
Atque illi, felicissumo omnium ante civilem victoriam, numquam
super industriam fortuna fuit, multique dubitavere fortior an
felicior esset.  Nam postea quae fecerit, incertum habeo an pigeat
magis disserere.

---------------------

Igitur Sulla, uti supra dictum est, postquam in Africam atque in
castra Mari cum equitatu venit, rudis antea et ignarus belli,
sollertissumus omnium in paucis tempestatibus factus est.  Ad hoc
milites benigne appellare; multis rogantibus, aliis per se ipse
dare beneficia; invitus accipere, sed ea properantius quam aes
mutuum reddere; ipse ab nullo repetere, magis id laborare ut illi
quam plurumi deberent; ioca atque seria cum humillumis agere; in
operibus, in agmine, atque ad vigilias multus adesse; neque
interim, quod prava ambitio solet, consulis aut cuiusquam boni
famam laedere; tantum modo neque consilio neque manu priorem
alium pati, plerosque antevenire.  Quibus rebus et artibus brevi
Mario militibusque carissumus factus est.


And so after Sulla came to Africa and entered Marius' camp with
his cavalry, as we said above, while he used to be unlearned and
knew nothing of war, in a short while he became the smartest man
in the room.  Moreover, he addressed the soldiers in a kindly
manner; he gave favors to the many who asked for them, and to
others on his own initiative; he accepted favors reluctantly, and
returned them more hastily than a loan; he himself demanded to be
repaid by no-one, but worked it so that as many as possible
should be in his debt; he joked and was serious with the humblest
soldiers; he was often seen in the fortifications, on the march,
and on watch; and in the meantime, since perverse ambition was
common, he didn't injure the reputation of any wellborn man,
whether a consul or anyone else.  In such a way by neither
thought or deed did he let another man get ahead of him, he
outstripped most men.  And by these deeds and practices in a
short while he came to be very dear to Marius and the soldiers.


Concerning Sulla's character and manner

Now, while this business was being carried on, the quaestor
L. Sulla came into the Romans' camp with a large body of cavalry.
And since the affair reminded us of so great a man, it seemed
suitable to speak a bit about his character and manner.  For I'm
not going to talk about Sulla's deeds anywhere else, and
L. Sisenna, who of all men has managed to most aptly and
diligently describe these things, seems to have done so with a
with too little freedom of speech.

So Sulla was of a well-born patrician clan, from a branch by then
nearly reduced to obscurity by the laziness of his ancestors;
equally well educated in both Greek and Latin literature; with a
remarkable intellect; eager for pleasure but passionate for
glory; he was a man of immoderate leisure; yet his enjoyment was
never delayed by his duties, except that he could have behaved
more reputably with regards to his wife; eloquent, clever, and
courteous in friendship; with an incredible depth of ingenuity
for feigning his duties; a liberal giver of many things, and
especially of money.  And for him, the luckiest of all men before
his civil victory, his luck was never above his industry, and
many hesitated to decide whether he was more powerful or luckier.
For what he would come to do afterwards, I hold as uncertain
whether or not it would disgust one more to discuss.
