Proscriptio Sullana

Sulla quoque immensis accessit cladibus ultor.
Ille quod exiguum restabat sanguinis urbi
hausit;  dumque nimis iam putria membra recidit,
excessit medicina modum.  Periere nocentes,
sed cum iam soli possent superesse nocentes.
Tunc data libertas odiis, resolutaque legum
frenis ira ruit. Non uni cuncta dabantur,
sed fecit sibi quisque nefas; semel omnia victor
iusserat. Infandum domini per viscera ferrum
exegit famulus;  nati maduere paterno
sanguine; certatum est, cui cervix caesa parentis
cederet; in fratrum ceciderunt praemia fratres.
Colla ducum pilo trepidam gestata per urbem
et medio congesta Foro;  cognoscitur illic
quidquid ubique iacet. Densi vix agmina volgi
inter et exsangues immissa morte catervas
victores movere manus. Vix caede peracta
procumbunt, dubiaque labant cervice.


The proscription of Sulla

The avenger Sulla likewise added to the vast carnage,
draining the paltry amount of blood left in the city;
and as he lopped off too much of rotting limbs,
his remedy went beyond the bounds.
The guilty perished, since only the guilty could still be left alive.
Then liberty, given over to hatred, and rage,
released from the reins of law, wrought destruction.
Not all crimes were ascribed to a single man,
but he committed each sin for himself; a victor once, he'd ordered it all.
The slave drove unspeakable iron through the guts of his master;
sons dripped with their father's blood;
it was contested to whom the severed head of a parent should go;
brothers fell for the profit of brothers.
The heads of leaders were borne on a pike through a frightened city
and piled up in the middle of the Forum;
one was recognized from that, there, not from where his body lay.
Between the streams of the thick mob and the bloodless crowds
that had been sent to death, the victors could scarcely move their hands.
When the massacre is finished they barely fell down,
but tottered with unsteady necks.


Sed illos
magna premit strages, peraguntque cadavera partem
caedis; viva graves elidunt corpora trunci.
Intrepidus tanti sedit securus ab alto 
spectator sceleris; miseri tot milia volgi
non timuit iussisse mori. Congesta recepit
omnia Tyrrhenus Sullana cadavera gurges;
in fluvium primi cecidere, in corpora summi.
Praecipites haesere rates; et strage cruenta
interruptus aquae fluxit prior amnis in aequor,
ad molem stetit unda sequens.  Iam sanguinis alti
vis sibi fecit iter, campumque effusa per omnem
praecipitique ruens Tiberina in flumina rivo
haerentes adiuvit aquas.  Nec iam alveus amnem
nec retinent ripae; redditque cadavera campo.
Tandem Tyrrhenas vix eluctatus in undas
sanguine caeruleum torrenti dividit aequor.
Hisne salus rerum, felix his Sulla vocari,
his meruit tumulum medio sibi tollere Campo?


But the great massacre overwhelmed those men,
and the corpses completed their share of the slaughter;
as heavy trunks crushed living bodies.
The undaunted spectator of such crime sat safely on high;
he had no fear to order so many thousands of the wretched mob to be killed.
The Tiber's flood recieved all of Sulla's heaps of corpses;
the first ones fell into the river, the last onto those bodies.
Rafts plunged in head-first and stuck;
and the waters of the river were broken by the bloody slaughter,
with the first part flowing into the sea, and the second stopped at the dam.
By now the deep rush of blood made a path for itself,
and after pouring out through the whole plain
and rushing headlong into the Tiber River
it aided the blocked waters with its stream.
And by now neither its bed nor its banks could hold the river;
and it returned the corpses to the plain.
Finally, having barely managed to force its way out into the Tiber's waves,
it divided the sky-blue sea with a torrent of blood.
Wasn't it by these things that Sulla deserved to be called
lucky, and the savior of the republic, 
and to erect a tomb for himself in the middle of the Campus?
