Petr. 5

Artis severae si quis ambit effectus
mentemque magnis applicat, prius mores
frugalitatis lege poliat exacta.
Nec curet alto regiam trucem vultu
cliensve cenas impotentium captet,
nec perditis addictus obruat vino
mentis calorem, neve plausor in scaenam
sedeat redemptus histrionis ad rictus.
Sed sive armigerae rident Tritonidis arces,
seu Lacedaemonio tellus habitata colono
Sirenumve domus, det primos versibus annos
Maeoniumque bibat felici pectore fontem.
Mox et Socratico plenus grege mittat habenas
liber et ingentis quatiat Demosthenis arma.
Hinc Romana manus circumfluat et modo Graio
exonerata sono mutet suffusa saporem.
Interdum subducta foro det pagina cursum
et furtiva sonet celeri distincta meatu;
dein epulas et bella truci memorata canore
grandiaque indomiti Ciceronis verba minetur.
His animum succinge bonis: sic flumine largo
plenus Pierio defundes pectore verba.

If anyone solicits accomplishment of strict art 
and applies his mind to great things,
let him first polish his character
with the exact law of frugality.
And let him care nothing for the savage palace with high looks
or let a client entice him with dinners for the headstrong,
nor let a man addicted by the damned bury with wine the glow of his mind, 
nor let the applauder sit on stage redeemed by the actor to an open mouth.
But whether the armed citadels of Tritonis laugh,
or the land is inhabited by the Lacedaemonian farmer or Sirens' home,
let him give the first years to verses
and drink from the Maeonian spring with a happy heart.
Let him next, filled with the Socratic herd, loose the reins
and as a free man brandish the remarkable weapons of Demosthenes.
From here let the Roman band, unburdened by sound in the Greek mode,
well up and overflow and change his taste.
Sometimes, away from the forum, let a page run its course 
and resound with a distinct swift furtive movement;
afterwards let him be driven to
banquets and wild beautiful memorable melodies 
and the lofty words of the fierce Cicero.
Gird up your heart with these good things:
so, filled with Macedonian,
you will pour out words 
as a bountiful river from your soul.
