Volume II

[XII] Veniebamus in forum deficiente iam die, in quo notavimus frequentiam
rerum venalium, non quidem pretiosarum sed tamen quarum fidem male
ambulantem obscuritas temporis facillime tegeret. Cum ergo et ipsi raptum
latrocinio pallium detulissemus, uti occasione opportunissima coepimus
atque in quodam angulo laciniam extremam concutere, si quem forte emptorem
splendor vestis posset adducere. Nec diu moratus rusticus quidam
familiaris oculis meis cum muliercula comite propius accessit ac
diligentius considerare pallium coepit. Invicem Ascyltos iniecit
contemplationem super umeros rustici emptoris, ac subito exanimatus
conticuit. Ac ne ipse quidem sine aliquo motu hominem conspexi, nam
videbatur ille mihi esse, qui tunicam in solitudine invenerat. Plane is
ipse erat. Sed cum Ascyltos timeret fidem oculorum, ne quid temere
faceret, prius tanquam emptor propius accessit detraxitque umeris laciniam
et diligentius temptavit.

As the day was fading we walked into the market place,
in which we observed an abundance of things for sale, 
not indeed expensive things, but nonetheless whose
wandering trustworthiness was hidden by the darkness of the hour.

Therefore, when we ourselves had offered the cloak carried off by robbery,
using the most opportune pretext and waving the outer hem in some corner,
if perchance the splendor of the garment could win over any buyer.

And in not long a kindly country bumpkin, who looked familiar,
with a foolish female companion approached nearer
and began to carefully examine the cloak.

In return Ascyltos, cast his eyes on our rustic customer's shoulders,
and was struck dumb with alarm.

And indeed I myself observed the man not without emotion,
for he seemed to me to be the one who had found the tunic in the woods.

Clearly, he was the very man.

But as Ascyltos dared not believe his eyes, for fear of what he might do,
he, as if he were a customer, drew near and pulled the hem off of 
the rustic's shoulders and tested it rather carefully.
