55. THE POISONED ROBE

Nessus igitur sagittā Herculis trānsfīxus moriēns humī iacēbat; at nē
occāsiōnem suī ulcīscendī dīmitteret, ita locūtus est: “Tū, Deīanīra, verba
morientis audī. Sī amōrem maritī tuī cōnservāre vīs, hunc sanguinem, quī
nunc ē pectore meō effunditur, sume ac repōne; tum, sī umquam in
suspiciōnem tibi vēnerit, vestem maritī hōc sanguine inficiēs.” Haec
locūtus, Nessus animam efflāvit; Deīanīra autem nihil malī suspicāta
imperāta fēcit. Paulō post Herculēs bellum contrā Eurytum, rēgem
Oechaliae, suscēpit; et cum rēgem ipsum cum fīliīs interfēcisset, Iolēn
eius fīliam captīvam sēcum redūxit. Antequam tamen domum vēnit,
nāvem ad Cēnaeum promuntūrium appulit, et in terram ēgressus āram
cōnstituit, ut Iovī sacrificāret. Dum tamen sacrificium parat, Licham
comitem suum domum mīsit, quī vestem albam rēferret; mōs enim erat
apud antīquōs, dum sacrificia facerent, albam vestem gerere. At Deīanīra
verita nē Herculēs amōrem ergā Iolēn habēret, vestem priusquam Lichae
dedit, sanguine Nessī infēcit.

And so Nessus, pierced by Hercules' arrow, lay dying on the ground.  But
rather than give up his chance for vengeance, he spoke thus: "You,
Deianira, hear the words of a dying man.  If you wish to preserve the
love of your husband, take up this blood which now flows out of my
breast and store it away; then, if a suspicion ever comes to you, seep
your husband's garment in this blood."  As soon as he said this Nessus
breathed his last.  But Deianira, suspecting no ill, performed his
commands.  A little later, Hercules undertook a war against Eurytus, the
king of Oechalia; and after he had killed that king, along with his
sons, he brought his daughter Iole back with him as a captive.  But before he
came home, he put the ship ashore at the Cenaeum headland, and,
embarking onto the land, erected an altar to sacrifice to Jupiter.  But
while he was preparing the sacrifice, he sent his companion Lichas to
his house to fetch his white cloak; for it was the custom among the
ancients to wear white while they made sacrifices.  But Deianira,
fearing that Hercules felt love torwards Iole, gave Lichas a cloak that
she had already stained with Nessus' blood.
