91. OUT OF DANGER

Hīs rēbus ita confectīs, Ulixēs veritus nē Polyphēmus fraudem
sentīret, cum sociīs quam celerrimē ad lītus contendit; quō cum
vēnissent, ab eīs quī nāvī praesidiō relictī erant magnā cum laetītiā
exceptī sunt. Hī enim cum anxiīs animīs iam trēs diēs continuōs
reditum eōrum exspectāvissent, suspicātī (id quidem quod erat) eōs
in aliquod perīculum magnum incidisse, ipsī auxiliandī causā
ēgredī parābant. Tum Ulixēs non satis tūtum arbitrātus in eō locō
manēre, quam celerrimē proficiscī cōnstituit. Iussit igitur omnēs
nāvem cōnscendere, et ancorīs sublātīs paulum ā lītore in altum
prōvectus est. Tum magnā voce exclāmāvit: "Tū, Polyphēme, quī
iūra hospitī spernis, iūstam et debitam poenam immānitātis tuae
solvistī." Hāc voce audītā Polyphēmus īrā vehementer commōtus
ad mare sē contulit, et ubi nāvem paulum ā lītore remōtam esse
intellēxit, saxum ingēns manū correptum in eam partem coniēcit
unde vōcem venīre sēnsit. Graecī autem, etsi nōn multum āfuit
quīn submergerentur, nūllō damnō acceptō cursum tenuērunt.

After events had so transpired, Ulysses, fearing that Polyphemus
would suss out his monkey business, rushed to the shore with his
companions as fast as they could go. Once they'd made it there they
were received with great joy by the men who had been left to guard
the ship. For they'd been anxiously awaiting their return for three
solid days, and supposed that they had fallen into some grave
danger (as had actually happened), and were getting ready to
disembark to offer their help.  Then Ulysses, having judged that it
was not safe enough to stay in that place, decided to depart as
soon as possible.  And so he commanded everyone to board the ship
and, after weighing anchor, sailed a little ways into deep water.
Then he cried out in a loud voice: "You, Polyphemus, who scorns the
laws of hospitality, have paid the just and due penalty for your
brutality."  When Polyphemus heard this speech, he was convulsed
with rage and betook himself to the sea. When he realized that the
ship had been pulled back a ways from the shore, he snatched up a
huge rock in his fist and flung it towards where he heard the voice
coming from.  But the Greeks, even though they were nearly swamped, 
suffered no damage and continued their journey.
