97. THE COUNTERCHARM

Aliquantum itineris prōgressus ad vīllam magnificam pervēnit,
quam cum oculīs perlustrāsset, statim intrāre statuit; intellēxit enim
hanc esse eandem domum dē quā Eurylochus mentiōnem fēcisset.
At cum in eō esset ut limen intrāret, subitō eī obviam stetit
adulēscēns formā pulcherrimā aureum baculum gerēns. Hīc Ulixem
iam domum intrantem manū corripuit et, “Quō ruis?” inquit.
“Nonne scīs hanc esse Circēs domum? Hīc inclusī sunt amicī tuī ex
hūmanā speciē in porcōs conversī. Num vīs ipse in eandem
calamitātem venīre?" Ulixes simul ac vōcem audīvit, deum
Mercūrium agnōvit; nūllīs tamen precibus ab institūtō cōnsiliō
dēterrērī potuit. Quod cum Mercūrius sēnsisset, herbam quandam
eī dedit, quam contrā carmina multum valēre dicēbat. “Hanc cape,”
inquit, “et ubi Circē tē baculō tetigerit, tū strictō gladiō impetum in
eam vidē ut faciās.” Mercūrius postquam fīnem loquendī fēcit,
  “mortālis vīsūs mediō sermōne relīquit,
   et procul in tenuem ex oculīs ēvānuit auram.”

He (Ulysses) had advanced along a fair stretch of the road when he came
to the magnificant villa.  And after running his eyes over it, he
decided to enter at once; for he realized that this was the same house
as the one that Eurylochus had made mention of. But once he was in such
a place from which he could cross the threshold, there suddenly stood
in his way a youth of a most comely appearance, wielding a golden
staff.  This youth seized Ulysses as he entered the house and said,
"Where are you running to? Don't you know that this is Circe's house?
This is where your friends were imprisoned, turned from human beings
into pigs. Do you really want to come to the same misfortune?"  Ulysses
recognized the god Mercury as soon as he heard the voice; but no plea
could deter him from the plan that he had decided on.  When Mercury
realized this, he gave him a certain herb, which he said would strongly
prevail against charms.  "Take this," he said, "and when Circe strikes
you with her staff, see that you launch an attack on her with your
naked sword."  After Mercury had made an end to his speaking,
  "he left the sights of mortal man in the middle of his speech,
   and vanished from their eyes far off into thin air."
