99. MEN ONCE MORE

Ulixēs autem ubi sēnsit eam timōre perterritam esse, postulāvit ut sociōs
suōs sine morā in hūmanam speciem rēdūceret (certior enim factus erat ā
deō Mercuriō eōs in porcōs conversōs esse); nisi id factum esset, sē
debitās poenās sumptūrum ostendit. Circē hīs rēbus graviter commōta eī
ad pedēs sē proiēcit, et multīs cum lacrimīs iūre iurandō cōnfirmāvit sē
quae ille imperāsset omnia factūram. Tum porcōs in atrium immittī iussit.
Illi datō signō irruērunt, et cum ducem suum agnōvissent, magnō dolōre
affectī sunt quod nūllō modō eum dē rēbus suīs certiōrem facere poterant.
Circē tamen unguentō quōdam corpora eōrum ūnxit; quō factō sunt
omnēs statim in hūmanam speciem reductī. Magnō cum gaudiō Ulixēs
suōs amīcōs agnōvit, et nūntium ad lītus mīsit, quī reliquīs Graecīs sociōs
receptōs esse diceret. Illī autem hīs rēbus cognitīs statim ad domum
Circaeam sē contulērunt; quō cum vēnissent, universī laetitiae sē
dēdērunt.

Now when Ulysses realized that she was filled with dread, he demanded
that she restore his companions to human form without delay (for he had
been informed by the god Mercury that they were turned into pigs); if
this wasn't done, then he was going to exact an fitting punishment.
Circe, deeply shaken by these events, threw herself at his feet, and with
a great many tears affirmed with a solemn oath that she would do
everything that he had ordered.  Then she ordered the pigs to be brought
into the hall.  After she gave the signal they rushed in, and when they
had recognized their leader, they were afflicted with intense grief
because there was no way that they could inform him of their situation.  
But Circe anointed their bodies with a certain oil; after this was done
they were all restored to a human appearance.  With great joy Ulysses
recognized his friends, and sent a messenger to the shore, who would tell
the rest of the Greeks that their companions were recovered.  Now when
they were acquainted with these events they betook themselves to
Circe's house, and when they got there, they all gave themselves over to
joy. 
